JBequest  ot 

to  tbc  Xibrar^ 
ot  tbe 

'mni\>er6iti?  of  ZToronto 

1901 


HANDBOUND 
AT  THE 


UNIVERSITY  OF 
TORONTO  PRESS 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2011  with  funding  from 

University  of  Toronto 


http://www.archive.org/details/essaysofprentisOOjame 


^  .'-  'N 


JAMES    VI   OF  Scotland,   I  of  Encla«d.. 

'^hc  ^ssngcs  of  a  ^rentise,  in 

Edinburgh.   1585. 

Jl  Counterblasts  to  l^obacco. 

London.   1604.  >    ./*'  O7 1/ 


CAREFULLY  EDITED  BY 

RDVVARD     ARBRR, 

AJj^ociate,  King's  College,  London,  F.R.G.S.,  &'c. 


LONDON : 

S   QUKh.N    .S(,)U.\KL,    HI  .<  m  j.M.^lJU  K^  ,  ^\.^-. 
Ent.  Siat.  Hall.]  I  October,    1 870.  \AU  Rights  rfferved. 


]\ 


CONTENTS. 


Introduction    ...  ...  3 

Bibliography     ......  6 

THE  ESSA  YES  OF  A  PRENTISE,  IN  THE  DIVINE 

ART  OF  POESIE. 
(I.)  The  Gatalogue  of  the  works  herein  contained  .  8 

(2.)  Recommendatory  Sonnets      .  .  .  .9-12 

<T^  rO  (3.)  Original  Poems  by  James  VL 

»      '    >  Twelve  Sonnets.     Invocations  to  the  Gods .  .    13-18 

Qi  5  ^  5  A  Tva.gedy—F/zce7ux  .  .  .     ^o-SO,  79-80 

^  Two  Sonnets— ( I.)  ^^^Z^^^^^^'?''-.     {.2.)  Decipher- 

v^      *  ing  the  perfedl  Poet  .  .  .  .56 

t  ^  1    0  ^  ^^°^^  Poem— (9/  Time    .  .  .  -73 

A  Sonnet    ......         78 

(4.)  Translations  by  James  VL 
T/^^  ^/r^/zzV  from  Du  Bart  AS        .  .  .    19-39 

Out  of  the  Poet  Zz/<r«;e       ....    51-52 

The  CIIII  Psalm,  out  of  Tremelliiis  .  .    70-72 

(5.)  A  fhort  Treatife,  containing  fome  Rules  and  Cautels 

to  be  obferved  and  efchewed  in  Scottifli  Poefy   .    53-69 
(6.)  A  Table  of  fome  obfcure  words  with  their  fignifications  75-77 

On  the  Introduction  and  Early  Use  of  Tobacco 

IN  England      .  .  .  81-94,113-120 

A  COUNTERBLAST  TO  TOBACCO. 
( I.)  To  the  Reader  ...  .  .  •    9M8 

2.)  A  Counterblast  TO  Tobacco        .  .  .99-112 


INTRODUCTION. 


literature  is  a  Republic  that  admits  of  no 
authority  but  that  of  Learning,  Genius, 
and  Perfuafion.  The  Writer — whether 
King,  Peer,  or  Commoner — is  judged 
with  one  judgment.  Curiofity,  Rever- 
ence, or  Loyalty  may  procure  for  a  Work  an  attentive 
reception  and  fome  prefent  applaufe  :  but  its  perpetu- 
ation, its  place  in  the  Literature  of  the  country,  will  de- 
pend upon  either  its  intrinfic  merits,  or  on  its  illustrative 
power  in  refpecl  to  the  age  in  which  it  was  written. 

On  thefe  latter  grounds,  the  Royal  productions  here 
reprinted  have  been  admitted  into  the  Series. 

The  Reulis  mid  Cnutdis  in  Scotiis  Poefie  bring  James 
VL  within  the  fucceffion  of  our  early  Poetical  Critics; 
whofe  writings — not  very  numerous,  but  now  exceffive- 
ly  fcarce — are  of  great  value  in  the  fludy  of  Englifli 
Poetry.  For — not  to  fpeak  of  their  often  preferring 
fnatches  of  poems  now  utterly  lofl — they  fhow  us  the 
theories  of  verification,  the  canons  of  Poetic  tafle 
and  flyle,  prevailing  in  our  country,  immediately 
before  the  advent  of  Spenfer,  Shakefpeare,  and  their 
fertile  contemporaries.  Thefe  writings  were  reprinted 
by  Mr.  Hallewood  in  his  Anciait  Critical  Effays,  2 
vols.  4to,,  181 1-16:  a  Reprint,  of  which  only  300 
copies  were  printed,  (and  a  portion  of  that  number 
deflroyed  by  fire),  which  is  now  fcarce;  and  which, 
when  met  with,  ufually  cofls  two  or  three  pounds. 
The  original  texts  being  fo  rare ;  Mr.  Haflewood's 
Reprint  was,  until  lately,  the  only  means  whereby 
mod  of  us  could  obtain  a  knowledge  of  this  important 
department  of  our  National  literature. 

In  purfuance,  therefore,  of  what  feemed  an  impera- 
tive duty :  thefe  Criticifms  in  Poefy  are  being  gradu- 
ally reproduced  in  this  Series.  To  the  four  now  pub- 
liHied — Gascoigne,  Sidney,  James  VL,  and  Putten- 
ham:  we  purpofe  adding  in  1870,  W.  Webbe's  Dif- 
courfe  (of  which  only  two  copies  remain) :  and  the  five 
produ(5lions,  forming  two-thirds  of  Mr.  Haflewood's 
Reprint  —  including  alfo  with  them    four   others   of 


4  IiitroduBion. 

a  differing  charadler — will  be  obtainable  for  5^".  6^., 
and  be  on  unlimited  fale.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  this 
advantageous  facility  of  knowledge,  may  allure  many 
to  a  more  thorough  delight  in  Elizabethan  poetry:  and 
that  by  a  combined  fLudy  of  thefe  Principles  of  Poefy 
with  the  Poems  themfelves,  many  may  attain  to  a 
more  fubtle  appreciation,  a  more  fenfitive  feeling  of 
that  Song — which,  in  its  aggregate  and  bulk,  is  the 
fweetefl  and  mofl  enchanting  in  our  Hiftory. 

How  much  the  Coimterblajle  reprefents  another  clafs 
of  our  Literature,  and  a  good  deal  of  our  former  man- 
ners :  the  notices  given  of  the  Tobacco  controverfy 
will  fhow.  Thus  both  works  fland  on  their  own  merits ; 
their  own  reputation  and  that  of  their  Royal  Author 
but  predifpofmg  them  to  a  courteous  reception. 

What  he  fays  in  the  Preface  to  his  other  poetical  work, 
Exercifes  at  vacant  hoiires^  mufl  not  be  forgotten  in  con- 
fidering  thefe  Effayes  or  Attempts  of  an  Apprentife  : 

And  in  case  thou  finde  aswel  in  this  work,  as  in  my  Lepanto  following, 
many  incorrect  errours :  both  in  the  dytement  and  orthography,  I  must  pray 
thee  to  accept  this  my  reasonable  excuse,  which  is  this.  Thou  considers,  I 
doubt  not,  that  vpon  the  one  part,  I  composed  these  things  in  my  verie  young 
and  tender  yeares  ;  wherein  nature,  (except  shee  were  a  monster)  can  admit 
of  no  perfection.  And  nowe  on  the  other  parte,  being  of  riper  yeares,  my 
burden  is  so  great  and  continuall,  without  anie  intermission,  that  when  my 
ingyne  and  age  could,  my  affaires  and  fasherie  would  not  permit  mee,  to  re- 
mark the  wrong  orthography  committed  by  the  copiars  cf  my  vnlegible  and 
ragged  hand,  far  les  to  amend  my  proper  errours ;  Yea  scarslie  but  at  stollen 
moments,  haue  I  the  leasure  to  blenk  vpon  any  paper,  and  yet  not  that,  with 
free  and  vnuexed  spirit.  Alwaies,  rough  and  vnpolished  as  they  are,  I  offer 
them  vnto  thee.     .     .     . 

Nothing  need  here  be  faid  of  the  king's  Sonnets 
and  Poems :  they  appraife  themfelves.  Of  the  refl , 
the  following  may  be  noted  : — 

1.  Mr.  GiLLiE.s,  writing,  in  1812,  his  Pref.  Mem.,  see  No.  2  on  p.  6, 
states — "Of  the  recommendatory  versifiers  T[homas  H[udson]  was  the  author 
of  a  trarslation  of  Dii  Barias's  History  of  Judith,  printed  at  Edinburgh  by 
Tl.on-.^G  Vautrolher,  and  republished  in  the  works  of  Du  Bartas  by  Joshua 
Sylvester.  R.  HtudsonJ,  probably  a  brother  of  the  preceding,  was  also  a 
writer  of  verses.  See  an  address  to  him,  by  Montgomery,  in  the  second 
volume  of  Sibbald's  Chronicle.  M.  W.  F.  is  obviously  Master  William  Fouler, 
author  of  The  Triumphs  0/  Petj-arkc  SiuA  The  Tarantula  of  Love,  extant 
in  MS.  in  the  College  Library  of  Edinburgh,  of  which  specimens  have  been 
published  by  Dr.  Leyden." 

2.  GiLLAUME  DE  Sai.luste,  Seigneur  du  Bartas  (b.  1544— d.  1590^  exer- 
cised a  considerable  influence  over  some  of  the  minor  English  poets  of  h  s 
time.  Something  like  mutual  laudation  passed  between  the  young  Scotch 
king  and  the  French  poet.  What  James  says  of  Du  Bartas  may  be  seen  at 
//.  20-21.  Not  long  after  these  Essayes,  the  king  wrote  a  poem  on  the  battle 
of  Lepanto:  in  a  French  translation  of  which,  by  Du  Bartas,  La  Lepa7iihe, 
is  the  following  Preface  from  the  Translator  to  the  Author,  in  which  the 
Frenchman  repays  the  .Scot  \n  full; — 


Tntroduclion.  5 

T  AQVES,  si  tu  tttnrchois  cTun  pied  in  oriel  fa  bos. 

Hardy  i' entreprendroy  de  talloner  tcs  pas : 

I'estendroy  totts  mes  tier/s,  et  ma  course  sacrie 

Loing,  Icing  lair ro it  H  dos  les  aisles  de  Bor^e. 

Mais  puis  qu  Aigle  nouueau  tu  te  guindes  /s  cieitx, 

Colle  bos,  ie  te  suy  seulevient  de  mes  yeux  : 

Mais plustost  du  desir :  ou,  si  ie  me  remtte, 

Ombre,  ie  vole  en  terre,  et  toy  dedans  la  nue. 

He  I  fusse  ie  z'rayment,  6  F/iaoiix  Escossois, 

Ou  r ombre  de  ton  corps,  ou  V EcJio  de  ta  voix. 

Si  ie  n'auoy  I'azur,  For,  et  Fargent  encore 

Dont  ton  plumage  astre  brillaiitement  sWtonnore, 

Au  moins  tauroy  ta  forme  :  et  si  mon  rudez'crs 

S'exprimoit  la  douceur  de  tant  d" accords  diners, 

II  retiendroit  quelque  air  de  tes  voix  plus  qu'  /uanaincs, 

Mais,  Pies,  taisez  votts  pour  ouyr  Ics  Cavicenes. 
3.  Emanuel  Tre.mili.iis,  was  a  Jew,  born  at  Ferrara  about  1510.  He 
became  first  a  Catholic,  then  a  Protestant  ;  was  a  celebrated  Hebrew  scholar, 
and  died  at  Sedan  on  9th  October  1580.  His  Latin  version  of  the  Scriptures 
— originally  brought  out  at  Frankfort — was  first  printed  in  London  in  1580, 
and  again  in  1581.  'Out  of  Tremillius'  therefore  simply  means; — translated 
from  out  of  the  Latin  version  of  the  Psalms,  edited  by  Tremillius. 

In  the  nineteen  years  intervening  between  the  pub- 
lication of  the  works  here  prefented  to  the  reader, 
James  publiflied  many  works  at  Edinburgh.  As  among 
others.  His  Majesty s  Poetical Exercifes  at  Vacant  hoiires, 
in  1 591,  confiding  of  his  tranflation  of  The  Furies  of  Du 
Bartas,  of  his  own  Lepanto,  and  of  Du  Bartas'  render- 
ing of  it,  La  Lepanthe.  His  Di^moiiologie  in  1599  :  and 
the  anonymous  and  fecret  firfl  edition — limited  to  feven 
copies — oi  Bafdikon  Doron  in  1599.  When  he  came 
to  the  Englifli  crown,  mofl  of  the  profe  works  were 
reprinted  in  London. 

Almofl  his  firfl  new  literary  produ6lion  as  King  of 
Great  Britain  and  Ireland  was  A  Coiinterblaste  to  To- 
bacco. So  far  as  hmited  time  and  fpace  have  permitted, 
we  have,  further  on,  furrounded  it  with  fomewhat  of  the 
antecedent  and  fubfequent  literature  of  the  fubje6l. 
Lovers  of  the  Pipe  fometimes  endeavour  to  stultify 
James'  Invective  :  by  fketching,  on  an  enlarged  fcale, 
tlie  perfonal  habits,  the  notions  and  conceits  of  the  fo- 
( ailed  Britifh  Solomon.  Here  again  the  Inve6live  mufl 
fland  on  its  own  merits.  What  it  is  in  itfelf,  we  can 
cClimate.  The  meafure  of  its  influence — efpecially 
when  its  Royal  authorfliip  became  generally  known — 
may  not  now  be  attainable.  As  a  matter  of  hiflory; 
it  failed  in  its  purpofe.  Tobacco  fmoking  flill  reigneth, 
and  will  yet  reign. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


5ri)e  €i>^iv^i^  of  a;  ^renti^e,  in  tl)e  pioine  3lrt  of 

Poeisie. 

(a)  JEssuES  in  tf)e  ^utf)or's  lifftime. 
I.  ^^  a  separate ptiblication. 

1.  1585.    Edinburgh.    .£^?V/tf/r7w^/j:  see  title  on  opposite  page. 

I  vol.  4to. 

II.   With  other  works. 
None. 

(b)  Issues  since  tlje  ^utfjor's  tteati). 
I.  As  a  separate  ^tiblication. 

2.  1814.    Edinburgh.     The  Essayes  of  a  Prentise,   in  the  Divine  Art  0/ 

I  vol.  4to.     Poesie;  with  a  prefatory  Memoir  by  R.  P.  Gillies,  F.  S.  A.  E. 

II.   With  other  works, 

3.  10  Dec.  1869.    Lond.     1  vol.  8vo.     English  Reprints;  see  title  at/,  i. 

%  Cottttterbla^te  to  tobacco. 

(a)  Issues  in  tlje  Sutf)or's  lifetime. 
I.  As  a  separate  publication. 

1.  1604.     London.     Editio princeps:  see  title  at/.  95.     [Anonymously  pub- 

I  vol.  4to.  lished,  and  now  very  scarce.  The  present  edition  is  re- 
printed from  a  copy  in  the  Bodleian  Library,  at  Oxford.] 

II.    With  other  works. 

2.  1616.     London.     The  [Prose]  Workes  of  James  I. .   Collected  and  edited 

I  vol.  fol.  by  James  Montagu,  Bp.  of  Winchester.  The  Cou/tter- 
blaste  is  at//.  211-212. 

3.  1619.     London,     The  same  translated  into  Latin,  by  the  same  Bishop. 

I  vol.  fol.  The  Ci?2.!;//^ri5/«jz'^ is  translated  at//.  189-207.  On/.  189,  it 
has  the  title  of  Misocap7ius  siue  De  Abiisti  Tobacci  Litstts 
Regius:  which  is  thus  varied  in  repetition  on  /.  200,  Miso- 
captius,  sen  htsus  Regius  de  abusu  Tobacci. 

(b)  Issues  since  tfje  ^utl^or's  lieatl). 
I.  As  a  separate  publication. 

None. 
II.   With  other  works. 

4.  1672.     London.     Two  Broad-Sides  against  Tobacco :  The  First  given  by 

I  vol.  4to.  King  James  of  famous  memory,  His  Counterblaste  to  To- 
bacco.  The  Second  transcribed  out  of  that  learned  Physician 
Dr.  EvERARD  Mavnvvaringe,  His  Treatise  of  the  ScJirvy. 
.  .  .  Concluding  with  Two  Poems  against  Tobacco 
[i.e.  an  extract  of  Sylvester's  Tobacco  battered;  see/.  118] 
and  Coffee.     Collected  and  published,  as  very  proper  for 

this  Age,  by  J.  H Licensed  according  to  Order. 

June  6,  1672. 

Or  with  a  slightly  different  title-page,  beginning  thus — 
King  James  His  Co7interblaste  to  Tobacco.     To  which 
is  added  a  Learned  Discourse  written  by  Di-.   Evekard 
Mavnvvaringe,  Proving  that  Tobacco  is  a  procuring  Cause 
of  the  Scurvy 

5.  16S9.   Frankfort.  Another  Latin  Edition  of  James*  prose  works :  in  which 

T  vol.  fol.       Misocapfius  is  included  at//.  95-99. 

6.  10  Dec.  1869.    London,    i  vol.    8vo.     English  Reprints:  see  title  at/,  i. 


THE   ESSAYES  OF 


A   PRENTISE,    IN   THE 


DIVIN  E    A  RT    OF 


r  0  E  S  I  E. 


Imprinted  at  Edinburgh,  by  Thomas 
Vautroullier. 

1585. 


CVM    PRIVILEGIO 

RET,  A  IT 


THE    CATALOGVE   OF   THE 

workis  heirin  conteined. 

''  I  ^He  tvvelf  Sonnets  of  Inuocations  to  the  Goddis. 

The  Vranie  or  heauenly  Mufe  tranjiafed. 

The  Metaphoricall  Inuentioun    of  a    Tragedie^   callit 
Phoenix. 

A  Paraphraflicall  tra?tflatioun  out  of  the  Poete  Lucane. 

A  treatife  of  the  airt  of  Scottis  Poefie. 

The  C 1 1 1 1.   Pfalme   of  Dauid,   tranflated   out   of 

Tremellius. 

A  Poeme  of  Tyme. 


SONNET. 

r^  F  Martiall  deeds,  and  pra6tife  of  the  pen 

Haue  wonne  to  auncient  Grece  a  worthie  fame  : 
If  Battels  bold,  and  Bookes  of  learned  men 
Haue  magnified  the  mightie  Ro7nain  name : 
Then  place  this  Prince,  who  well  deferues  the  fame  : 
Since  he  is  one  of  Mars  and  Pallas  race  : 
For  both  the  Godds  in  him  haue  fett  in  frame 
Their  vertewes  both,  which  both,  he  doth  embrace. 
O  Macedon,  adornde  with  heauenly  grace, 
0  RoiJiai7i  flout,  decorde  with  learned  fkill, 
The  Monarks  all  to  thee  fhall  quite  their  place  : 
Thy  endles  fame  fhall  all  the  world  fulfill. 
And  after  thee,  none  worthier  fhalbe  feene, 
To  fway  the  Sword ^  and  gaine  the  Lanrell  greene. 

T.  H. 


SONNET. 

HE  glorious  Grekis  in  (lately  flyle  do  blaife    [olde : 
The   lawde,   the  conqurour  gaue  their  Homer 
The  verfes  Ccefar  fong  in  Maroes  praife. 
The  Romanis  in  remembrance  depe  haue  rolde. 
Ye  Thefpian  Nymphes,  that  fuppe  the  NeHar  colde, 
That  from  Parnaffis  forked  topp  doth  fall, 
What  Alexander  or  Augujhis  bolde, 
May  found  his  fame,  whofe  vertewes  pafs  them  all  ? 
O  Phcebus,  for  thy  help,  heir  might  I  call. 
And  on  Minerue,  and  Maias  learned  fonne  : 
But  fince  I  know,  none  was,  none  is,  nor  fhall, 
Can  rightly  ring  the  fame  that  he  hath  wonne. 
Then  flay  your  trauels,  lay  your  pennis  adowne, 
For  CcEfars  works,  (hall  iuflly  Ccefar  crowne. 

K.  H. 


lO 


SONNET. 

tSt'He  mightie  Father  of  the  Mu/es  nyne 

^\      Who  mounted  thame  vpon  Farnafsus  hill, 

v->     Where  Phxbus  faire  amidd  thefe  Sifters  fyne 

With  learned  toung  fatt  teaching  euer  ftill, 

Of  late  yon  God  declared  his  woundrous  will, 

That  Vranie  fhould  teach  this  Prince  moft  rare  : 

Syne  fhe  informed  her  fcholler  with  fuch  fkill, 

None  could  with  him  in  Poefie  compaire. 

Lo,  heir  the  fru6lis,  Nymphe,  of  thy  fofler  faire, 

Lo  heir  (6  noble  loue)  thy  will  is  done. 

Her  charge  compleit,  as  deid  doth  now  declaire. 

This  work  will  witneffe,  fhe  obeyed  the  fone. 

O  Fhcebus  then  reioyce  with  glauncing  glore, 
Since  that  a  King  doth  all  thy  court  decore. 

M.  VV. 

SONNET. 

WHen  as  my  minde  exemed  was  from  caire, 
Among  the  N'yniphis  my  felf  I  did  repofe  : 
^^^--'^      Where  I  gaue  eare  to  one,  who  did  prepaire 
Her  fugred  voice  this  fequell  to  difclofe. 
Conveine  your  felfs  (6  fillers)  doe  not  lofe 
This  paffmg  tyme  which  hafteth  faft  away  : 
And  yow  who  wrytes  in  ftately  verfe  and  profe, 
This  glorious  Kings  immortall  gloire  difplay. 
Tell  how  he  doeth  in  tender  yearis  effay 
Aboue  his  age  with  fkill  our  arts  to  blaife. 
Tell  how  he  doeth  with  gratitude  repay 
The  crowne  he  wan  for  his  deferued  praife. 
Tell  how  of  loue,  of  Mars,  but  more  of  God 
The  gloire  and  grace  he  hath  proclaimed  abrod. 

M.  W.  F. 


II 


SONNET. 

/./?'  AN  goldin  Ti^an  fhyning  bright  at  mome 
L  [^     For  light  of  Torchis,  cafl  ane  greater  fhaw  ? 
<=i>     Can  Tlumder  reard  the  heicher  for  a  home  ? 
Craks  Carmons  louder,  thoght  ane  Cok  fould  craw  ? 
Can  our  weake  breath  help  Boreas  for  to  blaw  ? 
Can  Ca?idi/i  lowe  giue  fyre  a  greater  heit  ? 
Can  quhytefl  SiTajis  more  quhyter  mak  the  S?iavv  ? 
Can  Virgins  teares  augment  the  Winters  weit  ? 
Helps  pyping  Pan  Apollos  Mufique  fweit  ? 
Can  Foujitanis  fmall  the  Ocean  fea  increffc  ? 
No,  they  augment  the  greater  nocht  a  quheit : 
Bot  they  them  felues  appears  to  grow  the  lefTe. 

So  (worthy  Prince)  thy  works  fall  mak  the  knawin. 

Ours  helps  not  thyne  :  we  fleynzie  bot  our  awin. 


A.  M 


De  Jmius  Libri  Atcfiore,  Her  cults 
Rolloci  coniecSlura. 


m 


Vifquis  es,  entJieus  hie  exit  quo  Auclore  libelhcs^ 
{Na?n  liber  Auclorem  cofitieet  ipfe  finun) 


Dwn  qtiona7n  ingenio  meditor,  geiiioque  fuba^us ^ 
Maiora  Jmmanis  viribus  ijla  canas : 
Teqiie  adeo  qui  fis  expendo :  aict  Diuus  eSj  inquam^ 

Aut  a  Diiawi  aliquis  forte  fecundus  homo. 
Nil  fed  habet  fimile  aid  Diiiis^  aut  terra  fecutidum  : 

Qiianquam  illis  JReges  proxi?nus  ornat  ho?ios. 
Aut  opus  hoc  igitur  humane  femine  7iati 
Nullius,  aut  hoc  fc  Regis  oportet  opus* 


\l 


12 


ACROSTICHON. 

I     Nfigne  Au^oris  vetuit prcejigere  nomen 
A    u^oris  cunBa  pectus  vacuum  ambifiojie. 
C    uius  pr cedar  as  latides,  heroica  fafta^ 
O    mnigenafque  animi  dotes,  et  pe flora  vere 
B   elligera,  exornat  coelejlis  gratia  Mufoe. 

V  era  ijla  omnino  ejl  virtus,  virtuteque  maior 
S    ublimis  regnat  generofo  in  pe^ore  Chrijlus, 
S    cottia  fortunata  niinis  bona  ft  tua  noffes 
EX  iinij  vatis,  ple&rum  qui  pollice  dofto 

T  emperat,  et  Mufas  regalem  inducit  in  aulam : 

V  iflurus  pojl  fata  diu  :  Nam  fama  fuperjies 
S    emper  erit,  femper  florebit  gloria  vatis. 

Pa.  Ad.  Ep.  Sana. 
EIVSDEM    AD    LECTOREM 

E  P  I  G  R  A  M  M  A. 

queer  as  quisfit  tam  compti  car  minis  au6lor, 

Audlorem  audebis  Mufa  negare  tuum  ? 
I  lie  quidem  vetuit,  cui  te  par  ere  7ieceffe  ejl: 
Quis  tantum  in  Diuas  obtinet  imperium  ? 
Cui  pare?tt  MufcB,  Phcebus  quo  vate  fuperbit, 

Et  capiti  demit  laurea  ferta  fuo. 
Cui  laurif  et  fceptri  primi  debentur  honor es, 

Cui  multa  cingit  laude  tyara  caput. 
Quo  ducefpes  cert  a  ejl  diuifis  or  be  Britannis, 

Haud  diuifa  iterum  regnafutura  duo. 
Progenies  Regum,  Regnorumque  vnicus  hoeres^ 
Scilicet  obfcurus  delituifse potejl! 


ANE    OVADRAIN    OF 

A  L  E  X  A  N  D  R  I  N    VERS  E. 


In  graunting  this  my  fute,  which  after  follow  fhail. 


SONNET.    I. 

^^pTlRST  loue^  as  greateft.  God  aboue  the  reft, 

5Jr[      Graunt  thou  to  me  a  pairt  of  my  defyre  : 

\i7i     That  when  in  verfe  of  thee  I  write  my  bell, 

This  onely  thing  I  earneflly  requyre, 

That  thou  my  veine  Poetique  fo  infpyre, 

As  they  may  fuirlie  think,  all  that  it  reid. 

When  I  defcryue  thy  might  and  thundring  fyre, 

That  they  do  fee  thy  felf  in  verie  deid 

From  heauen  thy  greatefl  Thunders  for  to  leid, 

And  fyne  upon  the  Gyants  heads  to  fall  : 

Or  cumming  to  thy  Semele  with  fpeid 

In  Thmidcrs  leafl,  at  her  requefl  and  call : 

Or  throwing  Phaethoii  downe  from  heauen  to  eard. 

With  threatning  thunders,  making  monflrous  reaid. 


SONNET.    2. 

S)fh^ Polio  nixt,  affifl  me  in  a  parte, 
J^\^     Sen  vnto  lone  thou  fecound  art  in  might, 
^:^      That  when  I  do  defcryue  thy  fhyning  Carte, 
The  Readers  may  efleme  it  in  their  fight. 
And  graunt  me  als,  thou  worlds  6  onely  light, 
That  when  I  lyke  for  fubiedt  to  deuyfe 
To  wryte,  how  as  before  thy  countenaunce  bright 
The  yeares  do  Hand,  with  fcafons  dowble  twyfe. 
That  fo  I  may  defcryue  the  verie  guyfe 
Thus  by  thy  help,  of  yeares  wherein  we  Hue  : 
As  Readers  fyne  may  fay,  heir  furely  lyes. 
Of  feafons  fowre,  the  glaffe  and  picture  viuc. 
Grant  als,  that  fo  I  may  my  verfes  warpe, 
As  thou  may  jjlay  them  fyne  vpon  thy  Harpe. 


14 


SONNET.    3. 

VA^ND  firfl,  6  Phoebus,  when  I  do  defcriue    [flowrls, 
^j^     The  Spri7igtyme  fproutar  of  the   herbes   and 
^c-ir>     Whome  with  in  rank  none  of  the  foure  do  flriue, 
But  nearefl  thee  do  flande  all  tymes  and  howris : 
Graunt  Readers  may  efleme,  they  fie  the  fhowris, 
Whofe  balmie  dropps  fo  foftHe  dois  diftell, 
Which  watrie  cloudds  in  mefure  fuche  downe  powris, 
As  makis  the  herbis,  and  verie  earth  to  fmell 
With  fauours  fweit,  fra  tyme  that  onis  thy  fell 
The  vapouris  foftlie  fowkis  with  fmyling  cheare, 
VVhilks  fyne  in  cloudds  are  keiped  clofs  and  well, 
Whill  vehement  Wifiter  come  in  tyme  of  yeare. 

Graunt,  when  I  lyke  the  Sprmgty??ie  to  difplaye. 

That  Readers  think  they  fie  the  Spring  alwaye. 


SONNET.   4. 

ND  graunt  that  I  may  fo  viuely  put  in  verfe 
-^f^TL     The  Sommer,  when  I  lyke  theirof  to  treat : 

cr>     As  when  in  writ  I  do  theirof  reherfe, 
Let  Readers  think  they  fele  the  burning  heat, 
And  graithly  fee  the  earth,  for  lacke  of  weit, 
With  withering  drouth  and  Sunne  fo  gaigged  all, 
As  for  the  graffe  on  feild,  the  duft  in  flreit 
Doth  ryfe  and  flee  aloft,  long  or  it  fall. 
Yea,  let  them  think,  they  heare  the  fong  and  call, 
Which  Floras  wingde  muficians  maks  to  found. 
And  that  to  tafle,  and  fmell,  beleue  they  fhall 
Delicious  frui6lis,  whilks  in  that  tyme  abound. 
And  fhortly,  all  their  fenfes  fo  bereaued, 
As  eyes  and  earis,  and  all  may  be  deceaued. 


\ 


I; 


SONNET.   5. 

R  when  I  lyke  my  pen  for  to  implcy 

Of  fertile  Han.'ejl  in  the  defcription  trew  : 
Let  Readers  think,  they  inftantly  conuoy 
The  biifie  fhearers  for  to  reap  their  dew, 
By  cutting  rypcfl  cornes  with  hookes  anew  : 
Which  cornes  their  heauy  heads  did  dounward  bow, 
Els  feking  earth  againe,  from  whence  they  grew, 
And  vnto  Ceres  do  their  feruice  vow. 
Let  Readers  alfo  furely  think  and  trow, 
They  fee  the  painfull  Vig?teron  pull  the  grapes  : 
Firfl  tramping  them,  and  after  preffmg  now 
The  greneft.  cluflers  gathered  into  heapes. 

Let  then  the  Harvejl  fo  viue  to  them  appeare, 
As  if  they  faw  both  comes  and  cluflers  neare. 


SONNET.  6. 

v^JjlVT  let  them  think,  in  verie  deid  they  feill, 
pU     When  as  I  do  the  Winters  flormes  vnfolde, 
^^^     The  bitter  frofls,  which  waters  dois  congeill 
In  VVijifer  feafon,  by  a  pearfmg  colde. 
And  that  they  heare  the  whiddering  Boreas  bolde, 
With  hiddeous  hurling,  rolling  Rocks  from  hie. 
Or  let  them  think,  they  fee  god  Satiirne  olde, 
Whofe  hoarie  haire  owercouering  earth,  maks  flie 
The  lytle  birds  in  flocks,  fra  tyme  they  fee 
The  earth  and  all  with  flormes  of  fnow  owercled  : 
Yea  let  them  think,  they  heare  the  birds  that  die, 
Make  piteous  mone,  that  Satiir?ies  hairis  are  fpred. 
Apollo^  graunt  thir  foirfaid  fuitis  of  myne. 
All  fyue  I  fay,  that  thou  may  crowne  me  fyne. 


( 


i6 


SONNET.    7. 

fND  when  I  do  defcriue  the  Oceans  force, 
Graunt  fyne,  6  Neptune,  god  of  feas  profound, 
That  readars  think  on  leebord,  and  on  dworce, 
And  how  the  Seas  owerflowed  this  maffiue  rrmnd : 
Yea,  let  them  think,  they  heare  a  flormy  found, 
Which  threatnis  wind,  and  darknes  come  at  hand : 
And  water  in  their  fhipps  fyne  to  abound. 
By  weltring  waues,  lyke  hyefl  towres  on  land. 
Then  let  them  thinke  their  fhipp  now  low  on  fand. 
Now  climmes  and  fkippes  to  top  of  rageing  feas. 
Now  downe  to  hell,  when  fhippmen  may  not  fland, 
But  lifts  their  hands  to  pray  thee  for  fomeeas. 

Syne  let  them  think  thy  Trident  doth  it  calme, 
Which  maks  it  cleare  and  fmothe  lyke  glas  or  alme. 


SONNET.    8. 

fND  graunt  the  lyke  when  as  the  fwimming  fort 
Of  all  thy  fubieas  Ikaled  I  lifl  declare : 
As  Triton  monfler  with  a  manly  port, 
Who  drownd  the  Troyan  trumpetour  mofl  raire  : 
As  Marmaids  wyfe,  who  wepis  in  wether  faire  : 
And  marvelous  Monkis,  I  meane  Monkis  of  the  fee. 
Bot  what  of  monflers,  when  I  looke  and  flaire 
On  wounderous  heapes  ol  iubiedlis  feriiing  the  ? 
As  whailes  fo  huge,  and  Sea  eylis  rare,  that  be 
Myle  longs,  in  crawling  cruikis  of  fixtie  pace  : 
And  Daulphins,  SeaJwrfe,  Selchs  with  oxin  ee. 
And  Merfuvyjtis,  Perti'ikis  als  of  fiflies  race. 
In  fhort,  no  fowle  doth  flie,  nor  beafl  doth  go, 
But  thow  hafl  fifhes  lyke  to  them  and  mo. 


i 


17 


SONNET.    9. 

fDreidfiiU  Phito,  brother  thrid  to  lotie^ 
With  FroftTpin,  thy  wife,  the  qiiene  of  hell 
IVIy  fute  to  yow  is,  when  I  like  to  loaiie 
The  ioyes  that  do  in  Elife  field  excell : 
Or  when  I  like  great  Traf!;edies  to  tell : 
Or  flyte,  or  murne  \\\y  fate :  or  wryte  with  feare 
The  plagues  ye  do  fend  furth  with  Dirce  fell. 
Let  Readers  think,  that  both  they  fee  and  heare 
Ah'clo,  threatning  Tiirjiiis  fifler  deare  : 
And  heare  Ce/ce?ws  wings,  with  Harpyes  all : 
And  fee  dog  Cerberus  rage  with  hiddeous  beare. 
And  all  that  did  AEneas  once  befall. 

When  as  he  paR  throw  all  thofe  dongeons  dim, 
The  forefaid  feilds  fyne  vifited  by  him. 


SONNET.    10. 

Furious  Mars,  thow  warlyke  fouldiour  bold. 
And  hardy  Pallas^  goddels  flout  and  graue  : 
Let  Reidars  think,  when  combats  manyfold 
I  do  defcriue,  they  fee  two  champions  braue, 
With  armies  huge  approching  to  refaue 
Thy  will,  with  cloudds  of  dufl  into  the  air. 
Syne  Phifers,  Drummes,  and  Trumpets  cleir  do  craue 
The  pelmell  chok  with  larum  loude  alwhair, 
Then  nothing  hard  but  gunnis,  and  ratling  fair 
Of  fpeares,  and  clincking  fwords  with  glaun^^  fo  cle'r, 
As  if  they  foght  in  fkyes,  then  wrangles  thair 
Men  killd,  vnkilld,  whill  Parcas  breath  reteir. 

There  lyes  the  venquifht  wailing  fore  his  chaunce  : 
There  lyes  the  vidlor,  rewing  els  the  daunc  . 

B 


i8 


SONNET.    II. 


YAx  Nd  at  your  handis  I  earneflly  do  craue, 
[/A      O  facound  Mercure^  with  the  Mufes  nyne, 


'^^rScS)     That  for  condu6ling  guyde  I  may  you  haue, 

Afwell  vnto  my  pen,  as  my  Ingyne. 

Let  Readers  think,  thy  eloquence  deuyne 

O  Mercure,  in  my  Poems  doth  appeare  : 

And  that  Parnajjls  flowing  fountaine  fyne 

Into  my  works  doth  fliyne  lyke  crifl:all  cleare. 

O  Mufes,  let  them  think  that  they  do  heare 

Your  voyces  all  into  my  verfe  refound. 

And  that  your  vertewis  fmguler  and  feir 

May  wholly  all  in  them  be  alfo  found. 
Of  all  that  m.ay  the  perfyte  Poems  make, 
I  pray  you  let  my  verfes  haue  no  lake. 


SONNET.    12. 

N  fhort,  you  all  forenamed  gods  I  pray 
For  to  concur  with  one  accord  and  will, 
That  all  my  works  may  perfyte  be  alway 
Which  if  ye  doe,  then  fweare  I  for  to  fill 
My  works  immortall  with  your  praifes  flill : 
I  fhall  your  names  eternall  euer  fing, 
I  fhall  tread  downe  the  graffe  on  Parnafs  hill 
By  making  with  your  names  the  world  to  ring  : 
I  fliall  your  names  from  all  obliuion  bring. 
I  lofty  Virgin  fhall  to  life  reftoir, 
My  fubie6ts  all  flialbe  of  heauenly  thing, 
How  to  delate  the  gods  immortals  gloir. 
Effay  me  once,  and  if  ye  find  me  fwerue. 
Then  thinke,  I  do  not  graces  fuch  deferue. 

FINIS. 


THE     V  R A N I E 

tranflated. 


55-      -J'r 


^  To  the  fauor able 
Reader 

g^iAuing  oft  reuolued,  and  red  ouer  (fauorable 
Reader)  the  booke  and  Poems  of  the 
deuine  and  Illufler  Poete,  Salujl  du  Bar- 
tas,  I  was  moued  by  tJie  oft  reading  and 
perufing  of  them,  with  a  reflles  and  lofty  defire,  to 
preas  to  attaine  to  the  Hke  vertue.  But  fen  (alas)  God, 
by  nature  bathe  refufed  me  the  like  lofty  and  quick 
ingyne,  and  that  my  dull  Mufe,  age,  and  Fortune,  had 
refufed  me  the  lyke  fkill  and  learning,  I  was  conflrained 
to  haue  refuge  to  the  fecound,  which  was,  to  doe  what 
lay  in  me,  to  fet  forth  his  praife,  fen  I  could  not  merite 
the  lyke  my  felf  Which  I  thought,  I  could  not  do  fo 
well,  as  by  publifhing  fome  worke  of  his,  to  this  yle  of 
Brittaiii  (fwarming  full  of  quick  ingynes,)  afwell  as 
they  ar  made  manifefl  already  to  France.  But 
knowing  my  felf  to  vnfkilfuU  and  groffe,  to  tranflate 
any  of  his  heauenly  and  learned  works,  I  almofl  left  it 
of,  and  was  afliamed  of  that  opinion  alfo.  Whill  at 
the  laft,  preferring  foolehardines  and  a  good  intention, 
to  an  vtter  difpaire  and  fleuth,  I  refolued  vnaduyfedly 
to  affay  the  tranflating  in  my  language  of  the  eafiefl. 
and  fhorteft  of  all  his  difficile,  and  prolixed  Poems  :  to 
wit,  the  Vranie  or  heauenlye  Mufe,  which,  albeit  it  be 
not  well  tranflated,  yet  hope  I,  ye  will  excufe  me 
(fauorable  Reader)  fen  I  neither  ordained  it,  nor 
auowes  it  for  a  iuft  tranflation  :  but  onely  fet  it  forth, 
to  the  end,  that,  albeit  the  Prouerb  faith,  that  foole- 
hardines proceeds  of  ignoraunce,  yet  fome  quick 
fprited  man  of  this  yle,  borne  vnder  the  fame,  or  as 


The  Preface. 

happie  a  Planet,  as  Du  Bartas  was,  might  by  the  read- 
ing of  it,  bee  moued  to  tranflate  it  well,  and  befl, 
where  I  haue  bothe  euill,  and  worR  broyled  it. 

For  that  caufe,  I  haue  put  in,  the  French  on  the 
one  fide  of  the  leif,  and  my  blocking  on  the  other : 
noght  thereby  to  giue  proofe  of  my  iufl  tranflating,  but 
by  the  contrair,  to  let  appeare  more  plainly  to  the 
forefaid  reader,  wherin  I  haue  erred,  to  the  effecSi,  that 
with  leffe  difficulty  he  may  efcape  thofe  fnares  wherin 
I  haue  fallen.  I  mufl  alfo  defire  you  to  bear  with  it, 
albeit  it  be  replete  with  innumerable  and  intolerable 
faultes  :  fic  as,  Ryming  in  tearmes,  and  dyuers  others, 
whilkis  ar  forbidden  in  my  owne  treatife  of  the  Art  of 
Poefie,  in  the  hinder  end  of  this  booke,  I  mufl,  I  fay, 
praye  you  for  to  appardone  mee,  for  three  caufes. 
Firfl.,  becaufe  that  tranflations  are  limitat,  and  re- 
flraind  in  fome  things,  more  than  free  inuentions  are. 
Therefore  reafoun  would,  that  it  had  more  libertie  in 
others.  Secoundlie,  becaufe  I  made  noght  my  treatife 
of  that  intention,  that  eyther  I,  or  any  others  behoued 
aRricktly  to  follow  it :  but  that  onely  it  fliould  fhew 
the  perfection  of  Poefie,  whereunto  fewe  or  none  can 
attaine.  Thirdlye,  becaufe,  that  (as  I  fhewe  alreadye) 
I  avow  it  not  for  a  iufl  tranflation.  Befydes  that  I 
haue  but  ten  feete  in  my  lyne,  where  he  hath  twelue, 
and  yet  tranflates  him  lyne  by  lyne.  Thus  not  doub- 
ting, fauorable  Reader,  but  you  will  accept  my 
intention  and  trauellis  in  good  parte, 
(fen  I  requyre  no  farder,)  I 

bid  you  faire  well. 
* 

■55"     -k    4c 

•y?    ^   ^k   rr    rr 

•vt     ^     ^k 

* 


L'VRANIE,    OV    MVSE 

Celeste. 


E  n'elloy  point  encor   en   TAuril  de 
mon  aage, 
Qu'  vn  defir  d'affranchir  mon  renom 

du  trefpas, 
Chagrin,  me  faifoit  perdre  et  repos, 

et  repas, 
Par  le  braue  proiet  de  maint  fgauant 
ouurage. 

Mais  comme  vn  pelerin,  qui  fur  le  tard,  rencontre 
Vn  fourchu  carrefour,  douteux,  s'arrefle  court : 
Et  d'efprit,  non  des  pieds,  de  qk  de  Ik  difcourt, 
Par  les  diuers  chemins,  que  la  Lune  luy  monftre. 

Parmi  tant  de  fentiers  qui,  fleuris,  fe  vont  rendre 
Sur  le  mont,  ou  Phoebus  guerdonne  les  beaux  vers 
De  I'honneur  immortel  des  lauriers  tout-iour  verds, 
le  demeuroy  confus,  ne  fgachant  lequel  prendre. 

Tantofl  i'entreprenoy  d'orner  la  Grecque  Scene 
D'vn  veflement  Francois.    Tantofl  dvn  vers  plus  haut, 
Hardi,  i'enfanglantoy  le  Frangois  efchafaut 
Des  Tyrans  d'llion,  de  Thebes,  de  Mycene. 

le  confacroy  tantofl  a  I'Aonide  bande 
L'Histoire  des  Francois  :  et  ma  faincfle  fureur 
Defmentant  k  bon  droit  la  trop  commune  erreur, 
Faifoit  le  Mein  Gaulois,  non  la  Seine  Alemande. 

Tantofl  ie  deffeignoy  dvne  plume  flateufe 
Le  los  non  merite  des  Rois  et  grands  Seigneurs  : 
Et,  pour  me  voir  bien  toflriche  d'or,  et  dhonneurs, 
D'vn  coeur  bas  ie  rendoy  mercenaire  ma  Mufe. 

Et  tandis  ie  vouloy  chanter  le  fils  volage 
De  la  molle  Cypris,  et  le  mal  doux-amer, 


'\ 


THE    VRANIE,    OR    HEA 


VENLY    MVSE, 


Carce  was  I  yet  in  fpringtyme  of  my 
years, 

AVhen  greening  great  for  fameaboue 
my  pears 

Did  make  me  lofe  my  wonted  chere 
and  reft, 

Effaying  learned  works  with  curious 
breR. 

But  as  the  Fi/grifn,  who  for  lack  of  light, 
Cumd  on  the  parting  of  two  wayes  at  night. 
He  flays  affone,  and  in  his  mynde  doeth  cafl, 
What  way  to  take  while  Moonlight  yet  doth  lafl. 
So  I  amongfl  the  paths  vpon  that  hill, 
Where  Phcebus  crowns  all  verfes  euer  flill 
Of  endles  praife,  with  Laurers  always  grene, 
Did  flay  confufde,  in  doubt  what  way  to  mene. 
I  whyles  effaide  the  Grece  in  Frenche  to  praife, 
AVhyles  in  that  toung  I  gaue  a  lufly  glaife 
For  to  defcryue  the  Troiaii  Kings  of  olde, 
And  them  that  Thebes  and  Myce/is  crowns  did  holde. 
And  whiles  I  had  the  flor}'e  of  Fraunce  ele6led, 
Which  to  the  Mufes  I  fhould  haue  directed  : 
My  holy  furie  with  confent  of  nane. 
Made  frenche  the  Mein^  and  nowyfe  dutche  the  Sci7i. 
Whiles  thought  I  to  fet  foorth  with  flattring  pen : 
The  praife  vntrewe  of  Kings  and  noble  men. 
And  that  I  might  both  golde  and  honours  haue. 
With  courage  baffe  I  made  my  Mufe  a  flaue. 
And  whyles  I  thought  to  fmg  the  fickle  boy 
Of  Cypris  foft,  and  loues  to-fwete  anoy, 


24  L'  V  R  A  N  1  E. 

Que  les  plus  beaux  efprits  fouffrent  pour  trop  aimer, 
Difcours,  ou  me  poufsoit  ma  nature,  et  mon  aage. 

Or  tandis  qu'  inconflant  ie  ne  me  puis  refoudre, 
De  Qa,  de  la  poufse  d  vn  vent  ambitieux, 
Vne  fainte  beaute  fe  prefente  h.  mes  yeux, 
Fille,  comme  ie  croy,  du  grand  Dieu  lance-foudre. 

Sa  face  efl  angelique,  angelique  fon  gefle. 
Son  difcours  tout  diuin,  et  tout  parfait  fon  corps : 
Et  fa  bouche  k  neuf-voix  imite  en  fes  accords 
Le  fon  harmonieux  de  la  dance  celefle. 

Son  chef  eft  honor^  d'vne  riche  couronne 
Faite  h  fept  plis,  gliffans  d  vn  diuers  mouuement, 
Sur  chacun  de  fes  plis  fe  tourne  obliquement 
Ie  ne  fgay  quel  rondeau,  qui  fur  nos  chefs  raionne. 

Le  premier  efl  de  plomb,  et  d  eftain  le  deuxiefme, 
Le  troifiefme  d  acier,  le  quart  d  or  iauniffant, 
Le  quint  efl  compof(^  d  eledlre  palliffant, 
Le  fuyuant  de  Mercure,  et  d  argent  le  feptiefme. 

Son  corps  est  affuble  d  vne  mante  azuree, 
Semee  haut  et  bas  d  vn  million  de  feux, 
Qui  d  vn  bel  art  fans  art  diflindlement  confus, 
Decorent  de  leurs  rais  cefle  beaute'  facree. 

Icy  luit  le  grand  Char,  icy  flambe  la  Lyre, 
Icy  la  Poufsiniere,  icy  les  clairs  Beffons, 
Icy  le  Trebufchet,  icy  les  deux  Poiffons, 
Et  mille  autres  brandons  que  ie  ne  puis  defcrire. 

Ie  fuis  [dit  elle  alors]  cefle  do6le  vranie, 
Qui  fur  les  gonds  aflrez  tranfporte  les  humains, 
Faifant  voir  k  leurs  yeux,  et  toucher  a  leurs  mains, 
Ce  que  la  Cour  celefle  et  contemple  et  manie. 

Ie  quinte-efsence  1  ame  :  et  fay  que  le  Poete 
Se  furmontant  foy  mefme,  enfonce  vn  haut  difcours, 
Qui,  diuin,  par  1  oreille  attire  les  plus  fourds, 
Anime  les  rochers,  et  les  fleuues  arrefle. 

Agreable  efl  le  fonde  mes  do6les  germaines : 
Mais  leur  gofier,  qui  pent  terre  et  ciel  enchanter, 
Ne  me  cede  pas  moins  en  1  art  de  bien  chanter, 
Qu'au  Rofsignol-  I'Oifon,  les  Pies  aux  Syrenes.      [aifle 

Pren  moy  donques  pour  guide :  efleue  au  ciel  ton 


T  H  E     V  R  A  N  I  E.  2$ 

To  lofty  fprits  that  are  therewith  made  bl)nd, 

To  which  difcoiirs  my  nature  and  age  inclynd. 

But  whill  I  was  in  doubt  what  way  to  go, 

^Vith  wind  ambitious  tofled  to  and  fro  : 

A  holy  beuty  did  to  mee  appeare, 

The  T/nmdrers  daughter  feeming  as  fhe  weare. 

Her  porte  w^as  Angellike  with  Angels  face, 

With  comely  fhape  and  toung  of  heauenly  grace  : 

Her  nynevoced  mouth  refembled  into  found 

The  daunce  hannonious  making  heauen  refound. 

Her  head  was  honorde  with  a  coflly  crown, 

Seuinfolde  and  round,  to  dyuers  motions  boun  : 

On  euery  folde  I  know  not  what  doth  glance, 

Aboue  our  heads  into  a  circuler  dance. 

The  firfl  it  is  of  Lead,  of  Tin  the  nixt,  fhe  seuin 

The  third  of  Stele,  the  fourth  of  Gold  vnmixt,    Planets. 

The  fyfth  is  made  of  pale  Ele6lre  light. 

The  fixt  of  Mercure.  feuint  of  Siluer  bright. 

Her  corps  is  couured  with  an  Afure  gowne,     Fimament. 

Where  thoufand  fires  ar  fowne  both  vp  and  downe  : 

Whilks  with  an  arte,  but  arte,  confufde  in  order,    Fi^ed 

Dois  with  their  beames  decore  thereof  the  border.    Starres. 

Heir  (hynes  the  Charlewain,  there  the  Harp  giues  light, 

And  heir  the  Seamans  flarres,  and  there  Twinnis  bright, 

And  heir  the  Ballance,  there  the  Fifhes  twaine, 

With  thoufand  other  fyres,  that  pas  my  braine. 

I  am  faid  flie,  that  learned  Vranie, 

That  to  the  Starres  tranfports  humanitie. 

And  maks  men  fee  and  twiche  with  hands  and  ene 

It  that  the  heauenly  court  contempling  bene. 

I  quint-effence  the  Poets  foule  fo  well. 

While  he  in  high  difcours  excede  him  fell. 

Who  by  the  eare  the  deafefl  doeth  allure, 

Reuiues  the  rocks,  and  (layes  the  floods  for  fure.  Nyne 

The  tone  is  pleafaunt  of  my  *  fiRers  deir  :  Muses. 

Yet  though  their  throts  make  heauen  and  earth  admire, 

They  yeld  to  me  no  leffe  in  finging  well, 

Then  Pye  to  Syraine,  goofe  to  Nightingell. 

Take  me  for  guyde,  lyft  vp  to  heauen  thy  wing 


i 


26  L'VRANIE. 

Salufle,  chante  moy  du  Tout-puifsant  1  honneur, 
Et  remontant  le  luth  du  leffean  fonneur, 
Courageux,  broffe  apres  la  couronne  eternelle. 

le  ne  puis  d  vn  ceil  fee,  voir  mes  foeurs  maquerelles, 
Des  amoreuz  Francois,  dont  les  mignards  efcrits  [cris, 
Sont  pleins  de  feints  foufpirs,  de  feints  pleurs,  de  feints 
D'impudiques  difcours,  et  de  vaines  querelles. 

le  ne  puis  d  vn  ceil  fee  voir  que  1  on  mette  en  vente, 
Nos  diuines  chanfons  :  et  que  d  vn  fiateur  vers, 
Pour  gaigner  la  faueur  des  Princes  plus  peruers, 
Vn  Commode,  vn  Neron,  vn  Caligule  on  vante. 

Mais,  fur  tout,  ie  ne  puis  fans  foufpirs  et  fans  larmes 
Voir  les  vers  employez  contre  1  autheur  des  vers : 
le  ne  puis  voir  battu  le  Roy  de  I'vniuers 
De  fes  propres  foldats,  et  de  fes  propres  armes. 

L'homme  a  les  yeux  fillez  de  nuits  Cimmeriennes, 
Et  s'il  a  quelque  bien,  tant  foit  peu  precieux, 
Par  differentes  mains  il  1  a  receu  des  cieux : 
Mais  Dieu  feul  nous  apprend  les  chanfons  Delphiennes. 

Tout  art  s'apprend  par  art :  la  feule  Poefie 
Est  vn  pur  don  celefte  :  et  nul  ne  pent  goufter 
Le  miel,  que  nous  faifons  de  Pinde  degoutter 
S'il  n'a  d'vn  facre  feu  la  poitrine  faifie. 

De  cefle  fource  vient,  que  maints  grands  perfonnages 
Confommez  en  f^auoir,  voire  en  profe  diferts, 
Se  trauaillent  en  vain  k  compofer  des  vers : 
Et  qu'vn  ieune  apprenti  fait  de  plus  beaux  ouurages. 

De  Ik  vient  que  iadis  le  chantre  Meonide, 
Combien  que  mendiant,  et  fans  maiflre,  et  fans  yeux, 
A  vaincu  par  fes  vers  les  nouueaux,  et  les  vieux, 
Chantant  fi  bien  Vlyffe,  et  le  preux  Aeacide. 

De  Ik  vient  qu'vn  Nafon  ne  pent  parler  en  profe, 
De  Ik  vient  que  Dauid  mes  chants  fi  toll  aprit, 
De  pasteur  fait  Poete,  et  que  maint  ieune  efprit    [pofe. 
Ne  fgachant  point  noflre  art,  fuyuant  noftre  art  com- 

Recherche  nui6l  et  iour  les  ondes  CaflaHdes  : 
Regrimpe  nuidl  et  iour  contre  le  roc  Beffon  : 
Sois  difciple  d'Homere,  et  du  fain6l  nourriffon 
D'Ande,  I'heureux  feiour  des  vierges  Pierides. 


THE     V  R  A  N  I  E.  27 

0  Sa/uJI,  Gods  immortals  honour  fmg : 
And  bending  higher  Daiiids  Lute  in  tone, 
With  courage  feke  yon  endles  crowne  abone. 

1  no  wais  can,  vnwet  my  cheekes,  beholde 

My  fiflers  made  by  Frenchemen  macquerels  olde, 

Whofe  mignarde  writts,  but  faynd  lamenting  vaine, 

And  fayned  teares  and  fhamles  tales  retaine. 

But  weping  neither  can  I  fee  them  fpyte 

Our  heauenly  verfe,  when  they  do  nothing  wryte, 

But  Princes  flattery  that  ar  tyrants  rather 

Then  iVcro,  Couimode^  or  Caligule  ather. 

But  fpecially  but  fobbes  I  neuer  fliall 

Se  verfe  beflowde  gainR  him  made  verfes  all, 

I  can  not  fee  his  proper  foldiers  ding 

With  his  ov.-ne  amies  him  that  of  all  is  Kinsf. 

O 

Mans  eyes  are  blinded  with  Ciimnerien  night : 

And  haue  he  any  good,  beit  neuer  fo  light, 

From  heauen,  by  mediat  moyens,  he  it  reaches, 

Bot  only  God  the  Delphiens  fong  vs  teaches. 

All  art  is  learned  by  art,  this  art  alone 

It  is  a  heauenly  gift :  no  flefh  nor  bone 

Can  preif  the  honnie  we  from  Pinde  diflill, 

Except  with  holy  fyre  his  breefl  we  fill. 

From  that  fpring  flowes,  that  men  of  fpeciall  chofe, 

Confumde  in  learning,  and  perfyte  in  profe, 

For  to  make  verfe  in  vaine  dois  trauell  take. 

When  as  a  prentife  fairer  works  will  make. 

That  made  that  Homer,  who  a  fongfler  bene, 

Albeit  a  beggar,  lacking  mafler,  and  ene, 

Exceded  in  his  verfe  both  new  and  olde, 

In  finging  Vlifs  and  Achilles  bolde. 

That  made  that  Nafo  noght  could  fpeak  but  verfe. 

That  Daiiid  made  my  fongs  fo  fone  reherfe. 

Of  paRor  Poet  made,  yea  youngmen  whyles 

Vnknowing  our  art,  yet  by  our  art  compyles. 

Seke  night  and  day  Ca/lalias  waltring  waas, 

Climme  day  and  night  the  twinrocks  of  Paniaas : 

Be  Ho?ners  fkoller,  and  his,  was  born  in  Ande,         virgin 

The  happie  dwelling  place  of  all  our  bande. 


28  L'VRANIE. 

Lis  tant  que  tu  voudras,  volume  apres  volume, 
Les  liures  de  Pergame,  et  de  la  grande  cite, 
Qui  du  nom  d'Alexandre  a  fon  nom  emprunte : 
Exerce  inceffamment  et  ta  langue,  et  ta  plume. 

loin  tant  que  tu  voudras,  pour  vn  carme  bien  faire 
L'obfcure  nui6l  au  iour,  et  le  iour  a  la  nuidl, 
Si  ne  pourras  tu  point  cueillir  vn  digne  fruit 
D'vn  fi  fafcheux  trauail,  fi  Pallas  t'efl  contraire.     [forte, 

Car  du  tout  hors  de  1  homme  it  fault  que  1  homrne 
Sil  veut  faire  des  vers  qui  facent  tefle  aux  ans : 
II  fault  quentre  nos  mains  il  fequeflre  fes  fens  : 
II  fault  qu  vn  faint  ecftafe  an  plus  haut  ciel  Temporte. 

Dautant  que  tout  ainfi  que  la  fureur  humaine 
Rend  1  homme  moins  qu  humain  :  la  diuine  fureur 
Rend  1  homme  plus  grand  qu  homme  :  et  d  vne  faincSte 
Sur  le  ciel  porte-feux  h  fon  gre  le  promeine.       [erreur 

Ceft  d  vn  fi  facre'  lieu  que  les  diuins  poetes 
Nous  apportent  9a  bas  de  fi  docSles  propos, 
Et  des  vers  non  fuiets  au  pouuoir  d  Atropos, 
Truchemens  de  Nature,  et  du  Ciel  interpretes. 

Les  vrais  Poetes  font  tels  que  la  cornemufe. 
Qui  pleine  de  vent  fonne,  et  vuide  perd  le  fon : 
Car  leur  fureur  durant,  dure  auffi  leur  chanfon  : 
Et  fi  la  fureur  ceffe,  auffi  ceffe  leur  Mufe. 

Puis  donques  que  les  vers  ont  au  ciel  pris  naiffance, 
Efprits  vraym^ent  diuins,  aurez  vous  bien  le  coeur 
De  prononcer  vn  vers  et  profane,  et  moqueur 
Contre  cil,  qui  conduit  des  cieux  aflrez  la  danfe  ? 

Serez  vous  tant  ingrats,  que  de  rendre  vos  plumes 
Miniflres  de  la  chair,  et  femes  de  peche  ? 
Tout-iour  donques  fera  voflre  flyle  empefch^ 
A  remplir,  menfongers,  de  fonges  vos  volumes  ? 

Ferez-vous,  6  trompeurs,  tout-iour  d'vn  diable  vn  Ange? 
Fendrez  vous  tout-iour  I'air  de  vos  amoureux  cris  ? 
He  !  n'orra  on  iamais  dans  vos  do(fles  efcrits 
Retentir  haut  et  clair  du  grand  Dieu  la  louange  ? 

Ne  vous  fuffit  il  pas  de  fentir  dans  voflre  ame 
Le  Cyprien  brandon,  fans  que  plus  effrontez 
Qu'vne  Lays  publique,  en  cor  vous  euentez 


THE    VRANIE.  29 

How  oft  thou  lykes  reid  oner  booke  efter  booke, 

The  bookes  of  Troy,  and  of  that  towne  which  tooke 

Her  name  from  Alexander  Monark  then,  Alexandria 

Exerce  but  ceafe  thy  toung  and  eke  thy  pen. 

Yea,  if  to  make  good  verfe  thou  hes  fic  cure, 

loyne  night  and  day,  and  day  to  night  obfcure, 

Yet  fhall  thou  not  tlie  wortliy  frute  reape  fo 

Of  all  thy  paines,  if  Pallas  be  thy  fo. 

For  man  from  man  mufl  wholly  parted  be, 

If  with  his  age,  his  verfe  do  well  agree. 

Amongfl  our  hands,  he  mufl  his  witts  refmg, 

A  holy  trance  to  highefl  heauen  him  bring. 

For  euen  as  humane  fury  maks  the  man. 

Les  then  the  man  :  So  heauenly  fury  can 

Make  man  pas  man,  and  wander  in  holy  mifl, 

Vpon  the  fyrie  heauen  to  walk  at  lift. 

Within  that  place  the  heauenly  Poets  fought 

Their  learning,  fyne  to  vs  heare  downe  it  brouglit. 

With  verfe  that  ought  to  Atropos  no  dewe, 

Dame  N'aturs  trunclimen,  heauens  interprets  trevve, 

For  Poets  right  are  lyke  the  pype  alway, 

Who  full  doth  found,  and  empty  flayes  to  play : 

Euen  fo  their  fury  lafling,  lafls  their  tone, 

Their  fury  ceafl,  their  Mufe  doth  flay  affone. 

Sen  verfe  did  then  in  heauen  firft  bud  and  blume, 

If  ye  be  heauenly,  how  dar  ye  prefume 

A  verfe  prophane,  and  mocking  for  to  fmg 

Gainfl  him  that  leads  of  flarrie  heauens  the  ring? 

Will  ye  then  fo  ingrately  make  your  pen, 

A  flaue  to  fmne,  and  fcrue  but  fleflily  men  ? 

Shall  flill  your  brains  be  bufied  then  to  fill 

With  dreames,  6  dreamers,  euery  booke  and  bill  ? 

Shall  Satan  flill  be  God  for  your  behoue  ? 

Still  will  ye  riue  the  aire  with  cryes  of  lone  ? 

And  fliall  there  neuer  into  your  works  appeare. 

The  praife  of  God,  refounding  loud  and  cleare  ? 

Suftifis  it  noght  ye  feele  into  your  hairt 

The  Cipriaii  torche,  vnles  more  malapairt 

Then  Lais  commoun  quean,  ye  blow  abrod 


30  L'VRANIE. 

Par  le  monde  abufe  vostre  impudique  flamme  ? 

Ne  vous  suffit  il  pas  de  croupir  en  delices, 
Sans  que  vous  corrompiez,  par  vos  nombres  charmeurs, 
Du  le6teur  indifcret  les  peu-conflantes  moeurs, 
Luy  faifant  embrafser  pour  les  vertus  les  vices  ? 

Les  tons,  nombres,  et  chants,  dont  fe  fait  I'harmonie^ 
Qui  rend  le  vers  fi  beau,  ont  fur  nous  tel  pouuoir, 
Que  les  plus  durs  Catons  ils  peuuent  efmouuoir, 
Agitant  nos  efprits  d'vne  douce  manie. 

Ainfi  que  le  cachet  dedans  la  cire  forme 
Prefque  vn  autre  cachet,  le  Poete  f^auant, 
Va  fi  bien  dans  nos  coeurs  fes  paffions  grauant. 
Que  prefque  I'auditeur  en  I'auteur  fe  tranfforme. 

Car  la  force  des  vers,  qui  fecrettement  gHffe, 
Par  des  fecrets  conduits,  dans  nos  entendemens, 
Y  empreint  tous  les  bons  et  mauuais  mouuemens. 
Qui  font  reprefentez  par  vn  do6le  artifice. 

Et  c'efl  pourquoy  Platon  hors  de  fa  Republique 
Chaffoit  les  efcriuains,  qui  fouloient  par  leurs  vers 
Rendre  mefchans  les  bons,  plus  peruers  les  peruers, 
Sapans  par  leurs  beaux  mots  I'honnefLete  pubiique. 

Non  ceux  qui  dans  leurs  chants  marioient  les  beaux 
Auec  les  beaux  fuiets  :  ore  entonnans  le  los      [ternies 
Du  iuste  foudroyeur :  ore  d'vn  faint  propos, 
Seruans  aux  defuoyez  et  de  guides  et  d'Hermes. 

Profanes  efcriuains,  voftre  impudique  rime, 
Eft  caufe,  que  Ton  met  nos  chantres  mieux-difans 
Au  rang  des  bafteleurs,  des  boufons,  des  plaifans  : 
Et  qu' encore  moins  qu'eux  le  peuple  les  eflime. 

Vos  faites  de  Clion  vne  Thais  impure : 
D'Helicon  vn  bordeau  :  vous  faites  impudens, 
Par  vos  lafcifs  difcours,  que  les  peres  prudens 
Deffendent  k  leurs  fils  des  carmes  la  le6ture. 

Mais  fi  foulans  aux  pieds  la  deite  volage, 
Qui  blece  de  ces  traits  vos  idolatres  coeurs, 
Vous  vouliez  employer  vos  plus  faindles  fureurs 
A  faire  voir  en  France  vn  facre-faindl  ouurage. 

Chacun  vous  priferoit,  comme  eflans  fecretaires^ 
Et  miniftres  facrez  du  Roy  de  1  vniuers. 


THE     VRANIE.  31 

But  (hame,  athort  the  world,  your  fliameles  god  ? 

Abufers,  (laikes  it  not  to  lurk  in  lufl, 

Without  ye  fmit  with  charming  nombers  iufl 

The  fickle  maners  of  the  reader  flight, 

In  making  him  embrace,  for  day,  the  nigl.t  ? 

The  harmony  of  nomber  tone  and  fong, 

That  makes  the  verfe  fo  fair,  it  is  fo  flrong 

Ouer  vs,  as  hardefl  Catos  it  will  moue, 

With  fpreits  aflought,  and  fweete  tranfported  loue. 

For  as  into  the  wax  the  feals  imprent 

Is  lyke  a  feale,  right  fo  the  Poet  gent, 

Doeth  graue  fo  vine  in  vs  his  paflions  flrange, 

As  maks  the  reader,  halfe  in  author  change. 

For  verfes  force  is  fie,  that  foftly  flydes 

Throw  fecret  poris,  and  in  our  fences  bydes, 

As  makes  them  haue  both  good  and  euill  imprented, 

Which  by  the  learned  works  is  reprefented. 

And  therefore  Flatos  common  wealth  did  pack 

None  of  thefe  Poets,  who  by  verfe  did  make 

The  goodmen  euill,  and  the  wicked  worfe, 

Whofe  ])lcafaunt  words  betraied  the  publick  corfe. 

Not  thofe  that  in  their  fongs  good  tearmes  alwaife 

loynd  with  fair  Thems :  whyles  thundring  out  the  praife 

Of  God,  iufl  Thundrer  :  w^iyles  with  holy  fpeache, 

Lyke  Het'ines  did  the  way  to  flrayers  teache. 

Your  fhameles  rymes,  are  caufe,  6  Scrybes  prophane, 

That  in  the  lyke  opinion  we  remaine 

With  luglers,  buffons,  and  that  foolifli  feames  : 

Yea  les  then  them,  the  people  of  vs  efleames. 

For  Clio  ye  put  Thais  vyle  in  vre, 

For  Helicon  a  bordell.     Ye  procure 

By  your  lafciuious  fpeache,  that  fathers  fage 

Defends  verfe  reading,  to  their  yonger  age. 

But  lightleing*  yon  fleing  godhead  flight,  Cupide 

^Mlo  in  Idolatrous  breaRs  his  darts  hath  pight. 

If  that  ye  would  imploy  your  holy  traunce. 

To  make  a  holy  hallowde  worke  in  Fraunce  : 

Then  euery  one  wolde  worthy  fcribes  you  call^ 

And  holy  feruants  to  the  King  of  all. 


32 


L'  V  R  A  N  I  E. 


Chacun  reuereroit  comme  oracles  vos  vers  : 

Et  les  grands  commettroient  en  vos  mains  leurs  affaires 

La  liaifon  des  vers  fut  iadis  inuentee 
Seulement  pour  traitter  les  myfleres  facrez 
Auec  plus  de  refpe6l :  et  de  long  temps  apres 
Par  les  carmes  ne  fut  autre  chofe  chantee. 

Ainfi  mon  grand  Dauid  fur  la  corde  tremblante 
De  fon  luth  tout-diuin  ne  fonne  rien  que  Dieu. 
Ainfi  le  condu6leur  de  I'exercite  Hebrieu, 
Sauue  des  rouges  flots,  le  los  du  grand  Dieu  chante. 

Ainfi  ludith,  Delbore,  au  milieu  des  genfd' amies, 
Ainfi  lob,  leremie,  accablez  de  douleurs, 
D  vn  carme  bigarre  de  cent  mille  couleurs 
Defcriuoient  faintement  leurs  ioyes,  et  leurs  larmes. 

Voyla  pourquoy  Satan,  qui  fin  se  tranffigure 
En  Ange  de  clarte  pour  nous  enforceler, 
Ses  preftres  et  fes  dieux  faifoit  iadis  parler, 
Non  d  vne  libre  language,  ains  par  nombre,  et  mefure. 

Ainfi,  fous  ApoUon  la  folle  Phoemonoe 
En  hexametres  vers  fes  oracles  chantoit : 
Et,  par  douteux  propos,  cauteleufe  affrontoit 
Non  le  Grec  feulement,  ains  I'lbere,  et  I'Eoe. 

Ainfi  1  antique  voix  en  Dodone  adoree, 
Aefculape,  et  Ammon  en  vers  prophetizoient, 
Les  Sibylles  en  vers  le  futur  predifoient, 
Et  les  preflres  prioient  en  oraifon  nombree. 

Ainfi  Line,  Hefiode,  et  celuy  dont  la  lyre 
Oreilloit,  comme  on  dit,  les  rocs,  et  les  forefls, 
Oferent  autrefois  les  plus  diuins  fecrets 
De  leur  profond  f9auoir  en  do6les  vers  efcrire. 

Vous  qui  tant  defirez  vos  fronts  de  laurier  ceindre, 
Oil  pourriez  vous  trouuer  vn  champ  plus  fpacieux, 
Que  le  los  de  celuy  qui  tient  le  frein  des  cieux. 
Qui  fait  trembler  les  monts,  qui  fait  I'Erebe  craindre  ? 

Ce  fuiet  est  de  vray  la  Come  d  abondance, 
C'efl  vn  grand  magazin  riche  en  difcours  faconds, 
C'efl  vn  grand  Ocean,  qui  n'a  riue,  ny  fonds, 
Vn  furjon  immortel  de  diuine  eloquence. 

L'humble  fuiet  ne  peut  qu'humble  difcours  produire : 


T  H  E     V  R  A  N  I  E.  33 

Echone  your  verfe  for  oracles  wolde  take, 
And  great  men  of  their  counfell  wolde  you  make. 
The  verfes  knitting  was  found  out  and  tryit, 
For  fmging  only  holy  myfleries  by  it 
With  greater  grace.     And  efter  that,  were  pend 
Longtyme  no  verfe,  but  for  that  only  end. 
Eucn  fo  my  Dauid  on  the  trembling  firings 
Of  heauenly  harps,  Gods  only  praife  he  fnigs. 
Euen  fo  the  leader  of  the  Hebrezw  hofl 
Gods  praife  did  fmg  vpon  the  Redfea  cofl 
So  Judith  and  Dclbor  in  the  foldiers  throngs. 
So  lob  and  leremie,  preaft.  with  woes  and  wrongs. 
Did  right  defcr}-iie  their  ioyes,  their  woes  and  torts. 
In  variant  verfe  of  hundreth  thoufand  forts. 
And  therefore  crafty  Sathan,  who  can  feame 
An  Angell  of  light,  to  witch  vs  in  our  dreame, 
He  caufde  his  gods  and  preefls  of  olde  to  fpeake 
By  nomber  and  meafure,  which  they  durft  not  breake. 
So  fond  Phoemojio'e  vnder  Apollos  wing, 
Her  oracles  Hexameter  did  fmg : 
With  doubtfum  talk  fhe  craftely  begylde, 
Not  only  Grece,  but  Spaiiie  and  Indes  fhe  fylde. 
That  olde  voce  ferude  in  Dodon,  fpak  in  verfe, 
So  yE/adap  did,  and  fo  did  Aiiunon  fearfe. 
So  Sybills  tolde  in  verfe,  what  was  to  come  : 
The  Preefls  did  pray  by  nombers,  all  and  fome. 
So  Hefiod,  Line,  and  he*  whofe  Lute  they  fay,    Orpheus 
Made  rocks  and  forrefls  come  to  heare  him  play, 
Durfl  well  their  heauenly  fecrets  all  difcloes, 
In  learned  verfe,  that  foftly  flydes  and  goes. 
O  ye  that  wolde  your  browes  with  Laurel  bind. 
What  larger  feild  I  pray  you  can  you  find, 
Then  is  his  praife,  who  brydles  heauens  mofl  cleare, 
Maks  mountaines  tremble,  and  howefl  hells  to  feare? 
That  is  a  home  of  plenty  well  repleat : 
That  is  a  florehoufe  riche,  a  learning  feat. 
An  Ocean  hudge,  both  lacking  fhore  and  ground. 
Of  heauenly  eloquence  a  fpring  profound. 
From  fubiedls  bafe,  a  bafe  difcours  dois  fpring, 

c 


34 


L' VRANIE. 


Mais  le  graue  fuiet  de  foymefme  prodult 
Graues  et  mafles  mots  :  de  foymefmes  il  luit, 
Et  fait  le  fain6l  honneur  de  fon  chantre  reluire. 

Or  done  fi  vous  voulez  apres  vos  cendres  viure, 
N'imitez  Eroflrat,  qui  pour  viure,  brufla 
Le  temple  Ephefien  :  ou  celuy  qui  moula, 
Pour  eflendre  fon  nom,  vn  cruel  veau  de  cuiure. 

Ne  vueillez  employer  voflre  rare  artifice 
A  chanter  la  Cyprine,  et  fon  fils  emplume : 
Car  il  vaut  beaucoup  mieux  n'eftre  point  renommd, 
Que  fe  voir  renomme  pour  raifon  de  fon  vice. 

Vierges  font  les  neuf  foeurs,  qui  dancent  fur  Parnaffe, 
Vierge  voflre  Pallas :  et  vierge  ce  beau  corps 
Qu'  vn  fleuue  vit  changer  fur  les  humides  bords 
En  I'arbre  tout-iour  vert,  qui  vous  cheueux  enlace. 

Confacrez  moy  pluflofl  cefle  rare  eloquence 
A  chanter  hautement  les  miracles  compris 
Dans  le  facre  fueillet :  et  de  vos  beaux  efprits 
Verfez  la,  mes  amis,  toute  la  quinte-effence.        [melle 

Que  Chrifl,  comme  Homme-Dieu,  foit  la  croupe  iu- 
Sur  qui  vous  fommeillez.     Que  pour  cheual  aile 
L'Efprit  du  Trois-fois  grand,  d  vn  blanc  pigeon  voil^, 
Vous  face  ruifseler  vne  fource  immortelle. 

Tout  ouurage  excellent  la  memoire  eternize 
De  ceux  qui  tant  foit  peu  trauaillent  apres  luy : 
Le  Maufolee  a  fait  viure  iufquauiourd  huy 
Timothee,  Bryace,  et  Scope,  et  Artemife. 

Hiram  feroit  fans  nom,  fans  la  fainte  afsiflance 
Qu'il  fit  au  baftiment  du  temple  d'Ifrael. 
Et  fans  I'Arche  de  Dieu  I'Hebrieu  Befeleel 
Seroit  enfeueli  fous  eternel  filence. 

Et  puis  que  la  beaute'  de  ces  rares  ouurages 
Fait  viure  apres  la  mort  tous  ceux  qui  les  ont  faits, 
Combien  qu'auec  le  temps  les  plus  feurs  foient  deffaits 
Par  rauines,  par  feux,  par  guerres,  par  orages. 

Penfez,  ie  vous  fuppli,  combien  fera  plus  belle 
La  louange,  qu  heureux,  9a  bas  vous  acquerrez, 
Lors  que  dans  vos  faints  vers  D  i  e v  feul  vous  chanterez 
Puis  qu  vn  nom  immortel  vient  de  chofe  immortelle. 


THE     VR  AN  IE.  35 

A  lofty  fubiecfl  of  it  felfe  doeth  bring 
Graue  words  and  weghtie,  of  it  fclfe  dluine, 
And  makes  the  authors  holy  honour  Ihine. 
If  ye  wolde  after  aflies  liue,  bewaire, 
To  do  lyke  EroJIrat,  who  brunt  the  faire 
Ephefian  temple,  or  him,  to  win  a  name, 

*  \Vho  built  of  braffe,  the  crewell  Calfe  vntame.  Peiiiius 
Let  not  your  art  fo  rare  then  be  defylde, 

In  fmging  Venus  and  her  fethred  chylde  : 

For  better  it  is  without  renowme  to  be. 

Then  be  renowmde  for  vyle  iniquitie. 

Thofe  nyne  are  jNlaides,  that  daunce  vpon  Par7iaas  ? 

Leamd  Pallas  is  a  Virgin  pure,  lyke  as 

*  That  fair,  whome  waters  changed  on  wattry  banks  Daphne 
Into  *  that  tre  flill  grene,  your  hair  that  hanks.  Laureii 
Then  confecrat  that  eloquence  moft  rair. 

To  fmg  the  lofty  miracles  and  fair 

Of  holy  Scripture  :  and  of  your  good  ingyne, 

Poure  out,  my  frends,  there  your  fift-effence  fyne. 

Let  Chrifl  both  God  and  man  your  Twinrock  be, 

Whome  on  ye  llepe  :  for  that  *hors  who  did  lie,  Pegasus 

Speak  of  that  *thryfe  great  fpreit,  whofe  dow  mofl  white 

Mote  make  your  fpring  flow  euer  with  delyte.    Hoiyghost. 

All  excellent  worke  beare  record  euer  fliall. 

Of  trauellers  in  it,  though  their  paines  be  fmall. 

The  Maufole  tombe  the  names  did  eternife 

Of  Scope,  Timotheus,  Briace  and  Arteviife. 

But  Hh'avis  holy  help,  it  war  vnknowne 

^Vhat  he  in  building  Izraels  Temple  had  fhowne, 

Without  Gods  Ark  Befelcel  I  ewe  had  bene 

In  euerlafling  filence  buried  clene. 

Then,  fince  the  bewty  of  thofe  works  mofl  rare 

Hath  after  death  made  liue  all  them  that  ware 

Their  builders  :  though  them  felues  with  tyme  be  failde, 

By  fpoils,  by  fyres,  by  warres,  and  tempefls  quailde. 

I  pray  you  think,  how  mekle  fairer  fliall 

Your  happie  name  heirdowne  be,  when  as  all 

Your  holy  verfe,  great  God  alone  fhall  flng. 

Since  praife  immortall  commes  of  endles  thing. 


36  L'VRANIE. 

le  fgay  que  vous  direz  que  les  antiques  fables 
Sont  I'ame  de  vos  chants,  que  ces  contes  diuers, 
L'vn  de  1  autre  naiffans,  peuuent  rendre  vos  vers 
Beaucoup  plus  que  I'hifloire  au  vulgaire  admirables. 

Mais  ou  peut  on  trouuer  chofes  plus  merueilleufes 
Que  celles  de  la  Foy?  he  !  quel  autre  argument 
Auec  plus  de  tefmoins  noflre  raifon  defment, 
Qui  rabat  plus  I'orgueil  des  ames  curieufes  ? 

I'aymeroy  mieux  chanter  la  tour  Affyrienne, 
Que  les  trois  monts  Gregeois  l'vn  deffus  I'autre  entez 
Pour  dethrolner  du  ciel  les  dieux  efpouuantez  : 
Et  I'onde  de  Noe,  que  la  Deucalienne. 

I'aymeroy  mieux  chanter  le  changement  fubite 
Du  Monarque  d'Affur,  que  de  I'Arcadien, 
Et  le  viure  fecond  du  faint  Bethanien, 
Que  le  recolement  des  membres  d'Hippolite. 

L'vn  de  plaire  au  le6leur  tant  feulement  fe  mefle, 
Et  I'autre  feulement  tafche  de  profiter : 
Mais  feul  celuy  la  peut  le  laurier  meriter, 
Qui,  fage,  le  profit  auec  le  plaifir  mefle. 

Les  plus  beaux  promenoirs  font  pres  de  la  marine, 
Et  le  nager  plus  fuer  pres  des  riuages  verds  : 
Et  le  fage  Efcriuain  n'efloigne  dans  fes  vers 
Le  fgauoir  du  plaifir,  le  ieu  de  la  do6lrine. 

Vous  tiendrez  done  ce  rang  en  chantant  chofes  telles ; 
Car  enfeignans  autruy,  vous  mefmes  apprendrez 
La  reigle  de  bien  viure  :  et  bien-heureux,  rendrez 
Autant  que  leurs  fuiets,  vos  chanfons  immortelles. 

Laiffez  moy  done  a  part  ces  fables  furannees  : 
Mes  amis,  laiffez  moy  cefl  infolent  Archer, 
Qui  les  cceurs  otieux  peut  feulement  brefcher, 
Et  plus  ne  foyent  par  vous  les  Mufes  profane'es. 

Mais  las  !  en  vain  ie  crie,  en  vain,  las  !  ie  m  enroue : 
Car  1  vn,  pour  ne  fe  voir  conuaincu  par  mon  chant, 
Va,  comme  vn  fin  afpic,  fon  oreille  bouchant : 
L'autre  Epicurien,  de  mes  difcours  fe  ioue. 

L'autre  pour  quelque  temps  fe  range  en  mon  efchole 
Mais  le  monde  enchanteur  foudain  le  me  fouflrait, 
Et  ce  difcours  facre,  qui  les  feuls  bons  attrait, 


THE    V  RAN  IE.  37 

I  know  that  ye  will  fiiy,  the  aiincient  rabies 
Decores  your  fongs,  and  that  *  thofe  dy  uers  fables,  Mctamor 
Ilk  bred  of  other,  doeth  your  verfes  mak  p'^^^'-^ 

More  loued  then  floryes  by  the  vulgar  pack. 
But  where  can  there  more  wondrous  things  be  found, 
Then  thofe  of  faith  ?  6  fooles,  what  other  ground, 
With  wiines  mo,  our  reafons  quyte  improues, 
Beats  doun  our  pr}'de,  that  curious  queflions  moues  ? 
I  had  farr  rather  Babdl  tower  forthfett,  o^sa  Pin- 

Then  the  *thre  Greciaii  hilles  on  others  plett,        oiytn^us 
To  pull  doun  gods  afraide,  and  in  my  moode, 
Sing  Noes  rather  then  Daicalions  floode. 
I  had  far  rather  fmg  the  fuddaine  change  Nabuchad 

Oi  Affurs  monark,  then  oi  Areas  flrange.         "^2^'■■ 
Of  the*  Bethaniens  holy  lecond  lining,  Lazarus. 

Then  Hippolitts  with  members  glewde  reuiuing. 
To  pleafe  the  Reader  is  the  ones  whole  cair, 
The  vther  for  to  proffite  mair  and  mair : 
But  only  he  of  Laiirell  is  conding. 
Who  wyfely  can  with  proffit,  pleafure  ming. 
The  faireR  walking  on  the  Sea  coafl  bene, 
And  fuireR  fwmiming  where  the  braes  are  grene : 
So,  wyfe  is  he,  who  in  his  verfe  can  haue 
Skill  mixt  with  pleafure,  fports  with  doctrine  graue. 
In  fmging  kepe  this  order  fliowen  you  heir. 
Then  ye  your  felf,  in  teaching  men  fhall  leir 
The  rule  of  lining  well,  and  happely  fliall 
Your  fongs  make,  as  your  thems  immortall  all. 
No  more  into  thofe  oweryere  lies  delyte, 
My  freinds,  cafl  of  that  infolent  archer  quyte, 
Who  only  may  the  ydle  harts  furpryfe  : 
Prophane  no  more  the  Miifes  with  yon  cryes. 
But  oh  !  in  vaine,  with  crying  am  1  horce  : 
For  lo,  where  one,  noght  caring  my  fongs  force. 
Goes  lyke  a  crafty  fnaik,  and  floppes  his  eare  : 
The  other  godles,  mocks  and  will  not  heare. 
Ane  other  at  my  fchoole  abydes  a  fpace. 
While  charming  world  withdrawe  him  from  that  place  : 
So  that  difcours,  that  maks  good  men  reiofe, 


m 


38 


L'  V  R  A  N  I  E. 


Entre  par  vne  aureille,  et  par  I'autre  s'envolle. 

Las  !  ie  n  en  voy  pas  vn  qui  fes  deux  yeux  defsille 
Du  bandeau  de  Venus,  et  d  vn  profane  fiel 
De  fes  carmes  dorez  ne  corrompe  le  miel : 
Bien  que  de  bons  efprits  noflre  France  fourmille. 

Mais  toy,  mon  cher  mignon,  que  la  Neufuaine  fain6le 
Qui  de  Pegafe  boit  le  furjon  perennel, 
Fit  le  facre  fonneur  du  los  de  I'Eternel, 
Mefme  auant  que  de  toy  ta  mere  fufl  enceinte : 

Bien  que  cest  argument  femble  vne  maigre  lande, 
Que  les  meilleurs  efprits  ont  en  friche  laifse, 
Ne  fois  pour  1  auenir  de  ce  trauail  lafse  : 
Car  plus  la  glorie  efl  rare,  et  tant  plus  elle  efl  grande. 

Salvste,  ne  perds  cceur  fi  tu  vols  que  1  Enuie 
Aille  abbayant,  maligne,  apres  ton  los  naiffant : 
Ne  crain  que  fous  fes  pieds  elle  aille  tapiffant 
Les  vers  que  tu  feras,  comme  indignes  de  vie. 

Ce  monftre  blece-honneur  reffemble  la  MafLine, 
Qui  iappe  contre  ceux  qui  font  nouueau  venus, 
Pardonnant  toutesfois  a  ceux  qui  font  cognus, 
Curtoife  enuers  ceux  cy,  enuers  ceux  la  mutine. 

Ce  monflre  femble  encor  vne  fameufe  nue, 
Que  le  naiffant  Vulcan  prefse  de  toutes  pars, 
Pour,  noire,  1  eflouffer  de  fes  ondeux  brouillars : 
Mais  oil  plus  ce  feu  croift,  plus  elle  diminue. 

Sui  done  (mon  cher  fouci)  ce  chemin  non  froyable 
Que  par  ceux,  que  le  ciel,  liberal,  veut  benir, 
Et  ie  iure  qu  en  brief  ie  te  feray  tenir 
Entre  les  bons  efprits  quelque  rang  honorable. 

CefL  par  ce  beau  difcours  que  la  Mufe  ceiefle 
Tenant  vne  couronne  en  fa  pucelle  main. 
Attire  h  foy  mon  coeur  d  vn  tranfport  plus  qu'humain, 
Tant  bien  k  fes  doux  mots  elle  adioufle  vn  doux  gelle. 

Depuis,  ce  feul  amour  dans  mes  veines  bouillonne; 
Depuis,  ce  feul  vent  foufle  es  toiles  de  ma  nef : 
Bien-heureux  fi  ie  puis  non  pofer  fur  mon  chef, 
Ains  du  doigt  feulement  toucher  cefle  couronne. 


FINIS. 


T  H  E     V  R  A  N  I  E.  3 

At  one  eare  enters,  and  at  the  other  goes. 
Alas,  I  fe  not  one  vnvaill  his  ene 
From  Venus  vaill  and  gal  prophane,  that  bene 
To  golden  honnied  verfe,  the  only  harme. 
Although  our  France  with  lofty  fi)rits  doth  fwarme. 
Rut  thou  my  deir  one,  whome  tlie  holy  Nyiie^ 
Who  yearly  drinks  PcgaJIs  fountaine  fyne, 
The  great  gods  holy  fongller  had  receiued, 
Yea,  euen  before  thy  mother  the  conceiued. 
Albeit  this  fubie61:  feame  a  barren  ground, 
With  quickefl  fpreits  left  ley,  as  they  it  found, 
Irk  not  for  that  heirefter  of  thy  paine, 
Thy  glore  by  rairnes  greater  (hall  remaine. 

0  Sa/iijl,  lofe  not  heart,  though  pale  Inuye 
Bark  at  thy  praife  increafmg  to  the  fkye, 
Feare  not  that  flie  tread  vnder  foote  thy  verfe, 
As  if  they  were  vnworthie  to  reherfe. 

This  monfler  honnors-hurt  is  lyke  the  curr, 
That  barks  at  flrangers  comming  to  the  durr. 
But  fparing  alwaies  thofe  are  to  him  knowin, 
To  them  mofl  gentle,  to  the  others  throwin. 
This  monfler  als  is  lyke  a  rauing  cloude. 
Which  threatnes  alwayis  kendling  Vulcan  loud-e. 
To  fmore  and  dro\\Tie  him,  with  her  powring  raine. 
Yet  force  of  fyre  repellis  her  power  againe. 
Then  follow  furth,  my  fonne,  that  way  unfeard, 
Of  them  whom  in  fre  heauens  gift  haih  appeard. 
And  heare  I  fweare,  thou  fhortly  fhall  refaue 
Some  noble  rank  among  good  fpreits  and  graue. 
This  heauenly  Mufe  by  fuch  difcourfes  fair, 
Who  in  her  Virgin  hand  a  riche  crowne  bair : 
So  drew  to  her  my  heart,  fo  farr  tranfported, 
And  with  fwete  grace,  fo  fwetely  fhe  exhorted  : 
As  fmce  that  loue  into  my  braines  did  brew. 
And  fmce  that  only  wind  my  fliipfailles  blew, 

1  thought  me  blefl,  if  I  might  only  clame 

To  touche  that  crown,  though  not  to  weare  the  fame. 

F  T  NI S. 


ANE    METAPHORICALL 

INVENTION     OF    A     TRAGEDIE 

CALLED     Phoenix. 


A  Colomne  of  i8  lynes  feruing  for  a  Preface 
to  the  Tragedie  enfuyng. 


5  Elf  I 

2       Echo       2 

3    help,  that  both     3 

4    together  we,     4 

^5     Since  caufetherebe,  may     5 

6     now  lament  with  tearis.  My     6 

7     murnefull  yearis.      Ye   furies   als     7 

8    with  him,  Euen  Pluto  grim,  who  duells     8 

9     in   dark,    that  he,    Since  chief  we   fe  him     9 

10    to  you  all  that  bearis  The  ftyle  men  fearis  of    lO 

II     Dirse,   I  requeft,   Eche  greizlie  gheft  that    dwells     li 

12     beneth  the  fee,  With  all  yon  thre,  whofe  hairs  are  fnaiks     12 

12     full  blew,  And  all    your   crew,  affift  me  in  thir    twa :     12 

II     Repeit     and    flia     my    Tragedie     full     neir,    The     il 

10     chance  fell  heir,  then  fecundlie  is  beft,  Deuills     10 

9     void    of   reft,    ye   moue    all    that    it   reid,     9 

8     With    me   in   deid  lyke   dolour   them     8 

7     to    griv',    I     then     will     liv'    in     7 

6    leffer    greif  therebj.      Kyth     6 

5     heir  and  try  your  force     5 

4    ay  bent  and  quick,     4 

3     Excell         in      3 

2     fik    like    2 

1  ill,  I 

and  murne  with 

me.     From  Delphos  fyne 

Apollo  cum  with  fpeid  :  Whofe 

Ihining  light  my  cairs  will  dim  in  deid . 


:(}:   The  expanfion  of  the 
former  Colomne. 

E   If  Echo  help,  that  both  together  w  E 

(S  ince  caufe  there  be)  may  now  lament  with  teari  S 

M  y  murnefull  yearis.     Ye  furies  als  ^vith  hi  M 

E   uen  Pluto  grim,  who  dwels  in  dark,  that  h  E 

S    ince  cheif  we  fe  him  to  you  all  that  beari  S 

T   he  flyle  men  fearis  of  Dirse  :  I  requef  T 

E   che  greizlie  gheft,  that  dwells  beneth  the  S  E 

W  ith  all  yon  thre,  whofe  hairis  ar  fnaiks  full  ble  W 

A   nd  all  your  crew,  affifl  me  in  thir  tw  A 

R  epeit  and  fha  my  Tragedie  full  nei  R 

T   he  chance  fell  heir.     Then  fecoundlie  is  bef  T 

D   euils  void  of  refl,  ye  moue  all  that  it  rei  D 

W  ith  me,  indeid,  lyke  dolour  thame  to  gri  V 

I    then  will  liv',  in  leffer  greif  therebi  I 

K  ythe  heir  and  trie,  your  force  ay  bent  and  quic  K 

E   xcell  in  fik  lyke  ill,  and  mume  with  m  E 
From  Delphos  fyne  Apollo  cum  with  fpeid, 
Whofe  fhining  light  my  cairs  wil  dim  in  deid. 


I 


PHOENIX. 


HE  dyiiers  falls,  that  Fortune  geuis 
to  men, 
By  turning  ouer  her  quheill  to  their 

annoy, 
When  I  do  heare    them  grudge, 

although  they  ken 
That  old  blind  Dame,  delytes  to  let 
the  ioy 

Of  all,  fuche  is  her  vfe,  which  dois  conuoy 
Her  quheill  by  gefs  :  not  looking  to  the  right, 
Bot  ftill  turnis  vp  that  pairt  quhilk  is  too  light. 

Thus  quhen  I  hard  fo  many  did  complaine, 
Some  for  the  loffe  of  worldly  wealth  and  geir, 
Some  death  of  frends,  quho  can  not  come  againe  : 
Some  loffe  of  health,  which  vnto  all  is  deir. 
Some  loffe  of  fame,  which  ftill  with  it  dois  beir 
Ane  greif  to  them,  who  mereits  it  indeid : 
Yet  for  all  thir  appearis  there  fome  remeid. 

For  as  to  geir,  lyke  chance  has  made  you  want  it, 

Reflore  you  may  the  fame  againe  or  mair. 

For  death  of  frends,  although  the  fame  (I  grant  it) 

Can  noght  return e,  yet  men  are  not  fo  rair, 

Bot  ye  may  get  the  lyke.     For  feiknes  fair 

Your  health  may  come  :  or  to  ane  better  place 

Ye  mufl.     For  fame,  good  deids  will  mend  difgrace. 


P  H  OE  N  I  X.  43 

Then,  fra  I  faw  (as  I  already  told) 

How  men  complaind  for  things  whilk  might  amend, 

How  Dauid  Lindfay  did  complaine  of  old 

His  Fapingo^  her  death,  and  fudden  end, 

Ane  common  foule,  whofe  kinde  be  all  is  kend. 

All  thefe  hes  moved  me  prefently  to  tell 

Ane  Tragedie,  in  griefs  thir  to  excell. 

For  I  complaine  not  of  fic  common  cace, 

Which  diuerfly  by  diuers  means  dois  fall : 

But  I  lament  my  PJicciiix  rare,  whofe  race, 

Whofe  kynde,  whofe  kin,  whofe  offpring,  they  be  all 

In  her  alone,  whome  I  the  Ph<2nix  call. 

That  fowle  which  only  one  at  onis  did  line. 

Not  hues,  alas  !  though  I  her  praife  rc\  iue. 

In  Arable  cald  Fcdix  was  fhe  bredd 

This  foule,  excelling  Iris  farr  in  hew. 

Whofe  body  whole,  with  purpour  was  owercledd, 

Whofe  taill  of  coulour  was  celefliall  blew, 

With  fkarlat  pennis  that  through  it  mixed  grew : 

Her  craig  was  like  the  yallowe  bumiflit  gold, 

And  fhe  her  felf  thre  hundreth  yeare  was  old. 

She  might  haue  liued  as  long  againe  and  mair. 

If  fortune  had  not  (layde  dame  Naturs  will : 

Six  hundreth  yeares  and  fourtie  was  her  fcair, 

Which  Nature  ordained  her  for  to  fulfill. 

Her  natiue  foile  fhe  hanted  euer  flill. 

Except  to  E^ypt  whiles  fhe  tooke  her  courfe, 

Wherethrough  great  Nylus  down  runs  from  his  fourfe. 

Like  as  ane  hors,  when  he  is  barded  haile. 
An  fethered  pannach  fet  vpon  his  heid. 
Will  make  him  feame  more  braue  :  Or  to  aflaile 
The  enemie,  he  that  the  troups  dois  leid, 
Ane  pannache  on  his  healme  will  fet  in  deid  : 
Euen  fo,  had  Nature,  to  decore  her  face ; 
Giuen  her  ane  tap,  for  to  augment  her  grace. 


44  P  H  OE  N  I  X. 

In  quantitie,  fhe  dois  refemble  neare 
Vnto  the  foule  of  mightie  loue,  by  name 
The  AEgle  calld  :  oft  in  the  time  of  yeare, 
She  vfde  to  foir,  and  flie  through  diners  realme, 
Out  through  the  Azure  fkyes,  whill  fhe  did  fhame 
The  Sunne  himfelf,  her  coulour  was  fo  bright, 
Till  he  abafliit  beholding  fuch  a  light. 

Thus  whill  fhe  vfde  to  fcum  the  fkyes  about, 
At  lafl  fhe  chanced  to  fore  out  ower  the  fee 
Calld  Mare  Rubrum  :  yet  her  courfe  held  out 
Whill  that  fhe  pafl  whole  A  fie.   Syne  to  flie 
To  Europe  fmall  fhe  did  refolue  :  To  drie 
Her  voyage  out,  at  laft  fhe  came  in  end 
Into  this  land,  ane  flranger  heir  vnkend. 

Ilk  man  did  maruell  at  her  forme  mofL  rare 

The  winter  came,  and  fLorms  cled  all  the  feild : 

Which  florms,  the  land  of  fruit  and  corne  made  bare, 

Then  did  fhe  flie  into  an  houfe  for  beild. 

Which  from  the  fLorms  might  faue  her  as  an  fheild. 

There,  in  that  houfe  flie  firft  began  to  tame, 

I  came,  fyne  tooke  her  furth  out  of  the  fame. 

Fra  I  her  gat,  yet  none  could  gefs  what  fort 
Of  foule  fhe  was,  nor  from  what  countrey  cum  : 
Nor  I  my  felf :  except  that  be  her  port. 
And  gliftring  hewes  I  knew  the  fhe  was  fum 
Rare  flranger  foule,  which  oft  had  vfde  to  fcum 
Through  diners  lands,  delyting  in  her  flight ; 
Which  made  vs  fee,  fo  flrange  and  rare  a  fight. 

Whill  at  the  laft,  I  chanced  to  call  to  minde 
How  that  her  nature,  did  refemble  neir 
To  that  of  Phxiiix  which  I  red.     Her  kinde. 
Her  hewe,  her  fhape,  did  mak  it  plaine  appeir. 
She  was  the  fame,  which  now  was  lighted  heir. 
This  made  me  to  efteme  of  her  the  more, 
Her  name  and  rarenes  did  her  fo  decore. 


\\ 


Phoenix.  45 

Thus  being  tamed,  and  throughly  weill  acquent. 
She  took  delyte  (as  Hie  was  wount  before) 
What  tyme  that  T'ita)i  with  his  beames  vpfprent, 
To  take  her  flight,  amongs  the  fkyes  to  foire. 
Then  came  to  her  of  fowHs,  a  w^oundrous  flore 
Of  diuers  kinds,  fome  fimple  fowHs,  fome  ill 
And  rauening  fowlis,  whilks  hmple  onis  did  kill. 

And  euen  as  they  do  fwarme  about  their  king 
The  hunnie  Bees^  that  works  into  the  hyue : 
When  he  delyts  furth  of  the  flvepps  to  fpring. 
Then  all  the  leaue  \\\\\  follow  him  belyue, 
Syne  to  be  nixt  him  biffelie  they  flriue : 
So,  all  thir  fowlis  did  follow  her  with  beir. 
For  loue  of  her,  fowlis  rauening  did  no  deir. 

Such  was  the  loue,  and  reuerence  they  her  bure, 
Ilk  day  whill  euen,  ay  whill  they  fliedd  at  night. 
Fra  time  it  darkned,  I  was  euer  fure 
Of  her  returne,  remaining  whill  the  light. 
And  Fhcchus  ryfmg  with  his  garland  blight. 
Such  was  her  trueth,  fra  time  that  fhe  was  tame. 
She,  who  in  brightnes  Titans  felf  did  fhame. 

By  vfe  of  this,  and  banting  it,  at  lafl 

She  made  the  foules,  fra  time  that  I  went  out, 

Aboue  my  head  to  flie,  and  follow  faft 

Her,  who  was  chief  and  leader  of  the  rout. 

When  it  grew  lait,  fhe  made  them  flie,  but  doubt, 

Or  feare,  euen  in  the  cloffe  with  her  of  will. 

Syne  (he  her  felf,  perkt  in  my  chalmer  (lill. 

When  as  the  countreys  round  about  did  heare 
Of  this  her  byding  in  this  countrey  cold. 
Which  not  but  hills,  and  darknes  ay  dois  beare, 
(And  for  this  caufe  was  Scotia  calld  of  old,) 
Her  lyking  here,  when  it  was  to  them  told, 
And  how  flie  greind  not  to  go  backe  againe  : 
The  loue  they  bure  her,  turnd  into  dilVlaine. 


4e 


P  H  OE  N  1  X. 


Lo,  here  the  frui6ls,  whilks  of  Inuy  dois  breid, 
To  harme  them  all,  who  vertue  dois  imbrace. 
Lo,  here  the  frui6ts,  from  her  whilks  dois  proceid, 
To  harme  them  all,  that  be  in  better  cace 
Then  others  be.     So  followed  they  the  trace 
Of  proud  l7iuy,  thir  countreyis  lying  neir, 
That  fuch  a  foule,  fhould  lyke  to  tary  heir. 

Whill  Fortoun  at  the  lafl,  not  onely  moued 
Lmy  to  this,  which  could  her  not  content, 
Whill  that  Inuy^  did  feafe  fom  foules  that  loued 
Her  anis  as  femed  :  but  yet  their  ill  intent 
Kythed,  when  they  faw  all  other  foules  ftill  bent 
To  follow  her,  milknowing  them  at  all. 
This  made  them  worke  her  vndeferued  fall. 

Thir  were  the  rauening  fowls,  whome  of  I  fpak 
Before,  the  whilks  (as  I  already  fhew) 
Was  wount  into  her  prefence  to  hald  bak 
Their  crueltie,  from  fimples  ones,  that  flew 
With  her,  ay  whill  Ltuy  all  feare  withdrew. 
Thir  ware,  the  Rauin^  the  Stainchell^  and  the  Gled, 
With  others  kynds,  whom  in  this  malice  bred. 

Fra  Malice  thus  was  rooted  be  Inuy^ 
In  them  as  fone  the  awin  effe6ls  did  fhaw. 
Which  made  them  fyne,  vpon  ane  day,  to  fpy 
And  wait  till  that,  as  flie  was  wount,  flie  flaw 
Athort  the  fkyes,  fyne  did  they  neir  her  draw. 
Among  the  other  fowlis  of  dyuers  kynds, 
Although  they  ware  farr  diffonant  in  mynds. 

For  where  as  they  ware  wount  her  to  obey. 

Their  mynde  farr  contrair  then  did  plaine  appeare. 

For  then  they  made  her  as  a  commoun  prey 

To  them,  of  whome  flie  looked  for  no  deare. 

They  flrake  at  her  fo  bitterly,  whill  feare 

Stayde  other  fowlis  to  preis  for  to  defend  her 

From  thir  ingrate,  whilks  now  had  clene  miflcend  h^r. 


Phoenix.  47 

UTien  file  could  find  none  other  faue  refuge 
From  thefe  their  bitter  flraiks,  Hie  fled  at  lad 
To  me  ( as  if  flie  wolde  wiHie  me  to  iudge 
The  wrong  they  did  her )  yet  they  followed  fafl 
Till  Hie  betuix  my  leggs  her  felfe  did  cafl. 
For  fauing  her  from  thefe,  which  her  opprefl, 
W'hofe  hote  purfute,  her  fulTred  not  to  reft. 

Bot  yet  at  all  that  ferved  not  for  remeid, 
For  noghttheles,  they  fpaird  her  not  a  haire 
In  flede  of  her,  yea  whyles  they  made  to  bleid 
My  leggs  :  ( fo  grew  their  malice  mair  and  mair ) 
Which  made  her  both  to  rage  and  to  difpair, 
Firfl,  that  but  caufe  they  did  her  fuch  difliort : 
Nixt,  that  file  laked  help  in  any  fort. 

Then  hauing  tane  ane  dry  and  wethered  Rra, 

In  deip  difpair,  and  in  ane  lofty  rage 

She  fprang  vp  heigh,  outfleing  euery  fa : 

Syne  to  Paiichaia  came,  to  change  her  age 

Vpon  Apollo s  altar,  to  aflwage 

With  outward  fyre  her  inward  raging  fyre : 

Which  then  was  all  her  cheif  and  whole  defyre. 

Then  being  carefull,  the  event  to  know 
Of  her,  who  homeward  had  returnde  againe 
Where  fhe  was  bred,  where  florms  dois  neuer  blow, 
Nor  bitter  blafls,  nor  winter  fnows,  nor  raine, 
But  fommer  flill :  that  countra.y  doeth  fo  flaine 
All  realmes  in  fairnes.     There  in  hade  I  fent. 
Of  her  to  know  the  ylfew  and  event. 

The  meffinger  went  there  into  fic  hafle, 
As  could  permit  the  farrnes  of  the  way, 
By  croffing  ower  fa  mony  countreys  wafle 
Or  he  come  there.     Syne  with  a  lytle  flay 
Into  that  land,  drew  homeward  euery  day : 
In  his  returne,  lyke  diligence  he  fhew 
As  in  his  going  there,  through  realmes  anew. 


48  Phoenix. 

Fra  he  returnd,  then  fone  without  delay 
I  fpeared  at  him,  ( the  certeantie  to  try ) 
What  word  o{ Phoemx  which  was  flown  away? 
And  if  through  all  the  lands  he  could  her  fpy, 
Where  through  he  went,  I  bad  him  not  deny, 
But  tell  the  trueth,  yea  whither  good  or  ill 
Was  come  of  her,  to  wit  it  was  my  will. 

He  tolde  me  then,  how  fhe  flew  bak  againe, 
Where  fra  fhe  came,  and  als  he  did  receit. 
How  in  Paiichaia  toun,  fhe  did  remaine 
On  FJixbus  alter,  there  for  to  compleit 
With  Thus  and  Myrrh,  and  other  odours  fweit 
Of  flowers  of  dyuers  kyndes,  and  of  Incens 
Her  nefl.     With  that  he  left  me  in  fufpens. 

Till  that  I  charged  him  no  wayes  for  to  fpair, 

Bot  prefently  to  tell  me  out  the  reft. 

He  tauld  me  then.  How  Titajis  garland  thair 

Inflamde  be  heate,  reflexing  on  her  nefl:. 

The  withered  fl:ra,  which  when  fhe  was  oppreft 

Heir  be  yon  fowlis,  flie  bure  ay  whill  fhe  came 

There,  fyne  aboue  her  nefl  fhe  laid  the  fame. 

And  fyne  he  tolde,  how  flie  had  fuch  defyre 
To  burne  her  felf,  as  flie  fat  downe  therein. 
Syne  how  the  Sunne  the  withered  ftra  did  fyre. 
Which  brunt  her  nefl,  her  fethers,  bones,  and  fkin 
All  turnd  in  afh.     Whofe  end  dois  now  begin 
My  woes  :  her  death  maks  lyfe  to  greif  in  me. 
She,  whome  I  rew  my  eyes  did  euer  fee. 

O  deuills  of  darknes,  contraire  vnto  light, 

In  Phoebus  fowle,  how  could  ye  get  fuch  place. 

Since  ye  are  hated  ay  be  Phcebus  bright  ? 

For  ftill  is  fene  his  light  dois  darknes  chace. 

But  yet  ye  went  into  that  fowle,  whofe  grace, 

As  Phxbiis  fowle,  yet  ward  the  Sunne  him  fell. 

Her  light  his  ftaind,  whome  in  all  light  dois  dwell. 


Phoenix.  49 

And  thou  ( 6  Phoenix )  why  was  thow  fo  moued 

Thovv  foule  of  light,  be  enemies  to  thee, 

For  to  forget  thy  heauenly  hewes,  whilkis  loued 

Were  baith  by  men  and  fowlis  that  did  them  fee  ? 

And  fyne  in  hewe  of  aflie  that  they  fould  bee 

Conuerted  all :  and  that  thy  goodly  fliape 

In  Chaos  fould,  and  noght  the  fyre  efcape? 

And  thow  {  6  reuthles  Death)  fould  thow  deuore 

Her?  who  not  only  paffed  by  all  mens  mynde 

All  other  fowlis  in  hew,  and  Ihape,  but  more 

In  rarenes  ( fen  there  was  none  of  her  kynde 

But  fhe  alone )  whome  with  thy  flounds  thow  pynde  : 

And  at  the  lafl,  hath  perced  her  through  the  hart, 

But  reuth  or  pitie,  with  thy  mortall  dart. 

Yet  worfl  of  all,  fhe  lined  not  half  her  age. 

Why  flayde  thou  Tynie  at  leafl,  which  all  dois  teare 

To  worke  with  her?  O  what  a  cruel  rage. 

To  cut  her  off,  before  her  threid  did  weare  ! 

Wherein  all  Planets  keeps  their  courfe,  that  yeare 

It  was  not  by  the  half  yet  worne  away, 

Which  fould  with  her  haue  ended  on  a  day. 

Then  fra  thir  newis,  in  forrows  foped  haill, 

Had  made  vs  both  a  while  to  holde  our  peace, 

Then  he  began  and  faid,  Pairt  of  my  taill 

Is  yet  vntolde,  Lo  here  one  of  her  race, 

Ane  worm  bred  of  her  aOie  :  Though  fhe,  alace, 

(Said  he)  be  brunt,  this  lacks  but  plumes  and  breath 

To  be  lyke  her,  new  gendred  by  her  death. 


Venvoy. 

Apollo  then,  who  brunt  with  thy  reflex 
Thine  onely  fowle,  through  loue  that  thou  her  bure, 
Although  thy  fowle,  (whofe  name  doth  end  in  X) 
Thy  burning  heate  on  nowayes  could  indure, 

D 


5° 


P  H  OE  N  1  X. 


But  brunt  thereby  :  Yet  will  I  the  procure, 
Late  foe  to  FJmjiix^  now  her  freind  to  be  : 
Reuiuing  her  by  that  which  made  her  die. 

Draw  farr  from  heir,  mount  heigh  vp  through  the  air, 

To  gar  thy  heat  and  beames  be  law  and  neir. 

That  in  this  countrey,  v/hich  is  colde  and  bair, 

Thy  gliflring  beames  als  ardent  may  appeir 

As  they  were  oft  in  Arable-,  fo  heir 

Let  them  be  now,  to  make  ane  Phoenix  new 

Euen  of  this  worme  of  Phoenix  afhe  which  grew. 

This  if  thow  dois,  as  fure  I  hope  thou  fhall. 
My  tragedie  a  comike  end  will  haue  : 
Thy  work  thou  hath  begun,  to  end  it  all. 
Els  made  ane  worme,  to  make  her  out  the  laue. 
This  Epitaphe,  then  beis  on  Phxnix  graue. 

Here  lyeth,  vvhome  too  euen  be  her  death  and  end 

Apollo  hath  a  longer  lyfe  her  fend. 

FINIS. 


A      P  A  R  A  P  H  R  A  S  T  I  C  A  LL 

TRANSLATION     OVT    OF 
THE    POETE     LVCANE. 


LVCANVS    LIB. 

QVINTO. 

AEfaris  aii  airftcs  vejlrce  feiitire  putatis 

Damnum p off e  fiigce  ?      VeliUifi  cunfla  minentur 
Fliimina^  qiios  mi/cent pelago,  fiibducere  fontcs  : 
Non  magis  ablatis  vnqiiam  decreverit  cequor, 
Quam  mmc  crefcit  aquis.     An  vos  momenta ptitat is 
Vila  dediffe  inihi  ? 


If  all  the  floods  amongfl  them  wold  conclude 

To  flay  their  courfe  from  running  in  the  fee  : 

And  by  that  means  wold  thinke  for  to  delude 

The  Ocean,  who  fould  impaired  be, 

As  they  fuppofde,  beleuing  if  that  he 

Did  lack  their  floods,  he  fhould  decreffe  him  fell  : 

Yet  if  we  like  the  veritie  to  wye. 

It  pairs  him  nothing  :  as  I  fhall  you  tell. 


52 


LVCANVS    LIB.    V. 


For  out  of  him  they  are  augmented  all, 

And  mofl  part  crear,  as  ye  Ihall  perfaue  : 

For  when  the  Sunne  doth  fouk  the  vapours  fmall 

Forth  of  the  feas,  whilks  them  conteine  and  haue, 

A  part  in  winde,  in  wete  and  raine  the  laue 

He  render  dois  :  which  doth  augment  their  flrands. 

Of  Neptims  woll  a  coate  fyne  they  him  weaue, 

By  hurling  to  him  faft  out  ower  the  lands. 

When  all  is  done,  do  to  him  what  they  can 
None  can  perfaue  that  they  do  fwell  him  mair. 
I  put  the  cafe  then  that  they  neuer  ran  : 
Yet  not  thelefs  that  could  him  nowife  pair : 
What  needs  he  then  to  count  it,  or  to  cair. 
Except  their  foiies  wold  the  more  be  fhawin  ? 
Sen  though  they  flay,  it  harmes  him  not  a  hair, 
What  gain  they,  thogh  they  had  their  courfe  withdrawen  ? 

So  euen  ficlike  :  Though  fubie6ls  do  coniure 
For  to  rebell  againft  their  Prince  and  King  : 
By  ieauing  him  although  they  hope  to  fmure 
That  grace,  wherewith  God  maks  him  for  to  ring, 
Though  by  his  gifts  he  fhaw  him  felfe  bening. 
To  help  their  need,  and  make  them  thereby  gaine : 
Yet  lack  of  them  no  harme  to  him  doth  bring. 
When  they  to  rewe  their  folie  fhalbe  faine. 


Lenuoy. 

Then  Floods  runne  on  your  wounted  courfe  of  olde, 

Which  God  by  Nature  dewly  hes  prouyded  : 

For  though  ye  flay,  as  I  before  haue  tolde. 

And  cafl  in  doubt  which  God  hath  els  decyded  : 

To  be  conioynde,  by  you  to  be  deuyded  : 

To  kythe  your  fpite,  and  do  the  Depe  no  fkaith  .• 

Farre  better  were  in  others  ilk  confyded. 

Ye  Floods^  thou  Depe^  whilks  were  your  dewties  baitlL 

FINIS. 


ANE     SCHORT 

TREATISE, 

CONTEINING   SOME    REVLIS 

and  cautelis  to  be  obfeniit  and 

efchewit  in  Scottis 

Foefie. 


*  *  * 
***** 

*  *  * 

* 


A    QVADRAIN     OF    ALEXANDRIN 

VERSE,   DECLARING  TO   QVHOME  THE 
AiitJioiir  hes  direBit  his  labour. 


To  ignorajits  obdiwde^  quhair  vvilfitl  errour  lyis^ 
Nor  zit  to  cwiotis  folks,  qiihilks  carping  dois  deieB  thee, 
Nor  zit  to  learned  men,  qiiha  thifiks  thaine  onelie  vvyis, 
Bot  to  the  docile  bairns  of  knavvledge  I  dire  ft  thee. 


THE    PREFACE    TO 

the  Reader. 

[PIE  caufe  why  (docile  Reader)  I  haue  not 
dedicat  this  fhort  treatife  to  any  particular 
perfonis,  (as  comraounly  workis  vfis  to 
be)  is,  that  I  efleme  all  thais  quha  hes 
already  fome  beginning  of  knawledge, 
with  ane  earned  defyre  to  atteyne  to  farther,  alyke 
meit  for  the  reading  of  this  worke,  or  any  vther,  quhilk 
may  help  thame  to  the  atteining  to  thair  foirfaid  de- 
fyre. Bot  as  to  this  work,  quhilk  is  intitulit,  The 
Reulis  and  caiitelis  to  be  obferuit  and  efchevvit  in  Scottis 
Poefie^  ze  may  maruell  paraventure,  quhairfore  I  fould 
haue  writtin  in  that  mater,  fen  fa  mony  learnit  men, 
baith  of  auld  and  of  late  hes  already  written  thairof  in 
dyuers  and  fmdry  languages :  I  anfwer.  That  nocht- 
withftanding,  I  haue  lykewayis  writtin  of  it,  for  twa 
cauffis :  The  ane  is,  As  for  them  that  wrait  of  auld, 
lyke  as  the  tyme  is  changeit  fenfyne,  fa  is  the  ordour 
of  Poefie  changeit.  For  then  they  obferuit  not  Flow- 
ing, nor  efchewit  not  Ryming  iii  termes,  befydes  hndrie 
vther  thingis,  quhilk  now  we  obferue,  and  efchew,  and 
dois  well  in  fa  doing :  becaufe  that  now,  quhen  the 
warld  is  waxit  auld,  we  haue  all  their  opinionis  in  writ, 
quhilk  were  learned  before  our  tyme,  befydes  our  awin 
ingynis,  quhair  as  they  then  did  it  onelie  be  thair  awin 
ingynis,  but  help  of  any  vther.  Thairfore,  quhat  I 
fpeik  of  Poefie  now,  I  fpeik  of  it,  as  being  come  to 
mannis  age  and  perfe6lioun,  quhair  as  then,  it  was  bot 
in  the  infancie  and  chyldheid.  The  vther  caufe  is, 
That  as  for  thame  that  hes  written  in  it  of  late,  there 
hes  neuer  ane  of  thame  written  in  our  language.  For 
albeit  (indrie  hes  written  of  it  in  Engliili,  quhilk  is  lykefl 
to  our  language,  zit  we  differ  from  thame  in  fmdrie  reulis 
of  Poefie,  as  ze  will  find  be  experience.  I  haue  lyke- 
wayis omittit  dyuers  figures,  quhilkis  are  neceffare  to 
be  vfit  in  verfe,  for  two  caufis.  The  ane  is,  becaufe 
they  are  vfit  in  all  languages,  and  thairfore  are  fpokin 
of  be  Dii  Bellay,  and  fmdrie  vtheris,  quha  hes  written 


T  H  E     P  R  E  F  A  C  E.  55 

in  this  airt.  Qiihairfore  gif  I  wrait  of  them  alfo,  it 
fould  feme  that  I  did  bot  repete  that,  qiihilk  they 
haue  written,  and  zit  not  fa  weil,  as  they  haue  done 
already.  The  vther  caiife  is,  that  they  are  figures  of 
Rhetoriqiie  and  Dialecliqiie,  qiihilkis  airtis  I  profeffe 
nocht,  and  thairfore  will  apply  to  my  felfe  the  counfale, 
quhilk  Apelles  gaiie  to  the  flioomaker,  qiihen  he  faid  to 
him,  feing  him  find  fait  with  the  fliankis  of  the  Image 
of  Venus ^  efter  that  he  had  found  fait  with  the  pantoun, 
Ne  flit  or  vltra  O'cpidam. 

I  will  alfo  wiih  zow  (docile  Reidar)  that  or  ze 
cummer  zow  with  reiding  thir  reulis.  ze  may  find  in 
zour  felf  fie  a  beginning  of  Nature,  as  ze  may  put  in 
praclife  in  zour  verfe  many  of  thir  foirfaidis  preceptis, 
or  euer  ze  fie  them  as  they  are  heir  fet  doun.  For  gif 
Nature  be  nocht  the  cheif  worker  in  this  airt,  Reulis 
wilbe  bot  a  band  to  Nature,  and  will  mak  zow  within 
fhort  fpace  weary  of  the  haill  airt :  quhair  as,  gif 
Nature  be  cheif,  and  bent  to  it,  reulis  will  be  ane  help 
and  flaff  to  ^Nature.  I  will  end  heir,  left  my  preface 
be  langer  nor  my  purpofe  and  haill  mater  following  : 
wifhing  zow,  docile  Reidar,  als  gude  fucces  and  great 
proffeit  by  reiding  this  fliort  treatife,  as  I  tuke  earnifl 
and  willing  panis  to  blok  it,  as  ze  fie,  for  zour  caufe. 
Fare  weill. 

I  Haue  infert  in  the  hinder  end  of  this  Treatife, 
maid  kyndis  of  verfis  quhilks  are  not  cuttit  or 
brokin,  bot  alyke  many  feit  in  euerie  lyne  of  the  verfe, 
andhowtheyare  commounlynamit,with  my  opinioun  for 
quhat  fubieclis  ilk  kynde  of  thir  verfe  is  mcitefl  to  be  vfit. 

1^0  knaw  the  quantitie  of  zour  lang  or  fhort  fete  in 
they  lynes,   quhilk  I  haue  put  in  the  reule, 
quhilk  teachis  zow  to  knaw  quhat  is  Flowing,  I  haue 
markit  the  lang  fute  with  this  mark, —  and 
abone  the  heid  of  the  fliorte  fute,  I 
haue  put  this  mark     u  . 


M 


56 


SONNET     OF     THE     AVTHOVR 

TO  THE  READER. 

Jf/ii  En  for  zour  faik  I  vvryte  upon  zour  airt^ 
Apollo,  Pan,  and  ze  6  Mufis  nyne, 
And  thou,  6  Mercure,  for  to  help  thy  pairt 

I  do  implore,  fen  thou  be  thy  ingyne, 

Nixt  efter  Pan  had  found  the  quhiffUl,  fyne 

Thou  did perfyte,  that  quJiilk  he  bot  efpyit : 

And  efter  that  made  Argus  for  to  tyne 

[quha  kepit  lo)  all  his  vvindois  by  it. 

Concurre  ze  Gods,  it  can  not  be  denyit  : 

Sen  in  your  airt  of  Poefie  I  vvryte. 

Auld  birds  to  learne  by  teichiiig  it  is  try  it : 

Sic  docens  difcans  gtf  ze  help  to  dyte. 

Then  Reidar  fie  of  nature  thou  haue  pairt. 
Syne  laikis  thou  nocht,  bot  heir  to  reid  the  airt. 


SONNET     DECIFRING 

THE    PERFYTE    POETE. 

^7A  C  Ne  rype  ingyne,  ane  quick  and  vvalkned  witty 
(U^      With  fommair  reafons,  fuddenlie  apply  it, 
^^-^  For  euery  purpofe  vfing  reafons  fitt. 
With  fkilf nines,  where  learning  may  befpyit^ 
With  pithie  vvordis,  for  to  expres  zovv  by  it 
His  full  intention  in  his  proper  kid. 
The  puritie  quhairof  weill  hes  he  try  it : 
With  memorie  to  keip  quhat  he  dois  reid. 
With  fkilfulnes  andfiguris,  quhilks  proceid 
From  Rhetorique,  with  euerlaflingfame, 
With  vthers  woundring,  preaffing  with  all  fpeid 
For  to  atteine  to  meritefic  a  name. 
All  thir  into  the  perfyte  Poete  be. 
Goddis,  graiit  I  may  obteine  the  Laurell  trie. 


A 


57 


THE     REVLIS     AND     CAV- 

TKLIS     TO     BE     OBSERVIT 

and  efchewit  in  Scottis 

Foefie. 

CAP.   I 


IRST,   ze   fall   keip   iufl   cullouris, 
quhairof  the  cautelis  are  thir. 

That  ze  ryme  nocht  twyfe  in 
ane  fyllabe.  As  for  exemple,  that 
ze  make  not/r^z/^and  reproiie  ryune. 
together,  nor  hone  for  houeing  on 
hors  bak,  and  behouc. 

That  ze  ryme  ay  to  the  hinmefl 
lang  fyllable,  (with  accent)  in  the  lyne,  fuppofe  it  be 
not  the  hinmefl  fyllabe  in  the  lyne,  as  bakbyte  zovv, 
and  out  flyte  zovv,  It  rymes  in  byte  2iX\6.  flyte,  becaufe 
of  the  lenth  of  the  fyllabe,  and  accent  being  there,  and 
not  in  zovv,  howbeit  it  be  the  hinmefl  fyllabe  of 
ather  of  the  lynis.  Or  quejlion  and  digejlion,  It  rymes 
in  ques  and  ges,  albeit  they  be  bot  the  antepenult 
fyllabis,  and  vther  twa  behind  ilkane  of  thame. 

Ze  aucht  alwayis  to  note.  That  as  in  thir  foirfaidis,  or 
the  lyke  wordis,  it  rymes  in  the  hinmefl  lang  fyllabe 
in  the  lyne,  althoucht  there  be  vther  fhort  fyllabis  be- 
hind it,  Sa  is  the  hinmefl  lang  fyllabe  the  hinmeR 
fute,  fuppofe  there  be  vther  fliort  fyllabis  behind  it, 
quhilkis  are  eatin  vp  in  the  pronouncing,  and  na  vvayis 
comptit  as  fete. 

Ze  man  be  war  likewa)ds  (except  necefsitie  compell 
yow)  with  Rymi?ig  i7i  Termis,  quhilk  is  to  fay,  that 
your  firfl  or  hinmefl  word  in  the  lyne,  exceid  not  twa 
or  thre  fyllabis  at  the  maifl,  vfmg  thrie  als  feindill  as 
ye  can.  The  caufe  quhairfore  ze  fall  not  place  a  lang 
word  firfl  in  the  lyne,  is,  that  all  lang  words  hes  ane 


58 


REVLIS     AND     CAVTELiS 


fyllabe  in  them  fa  verie  lang,  as  the  lenth  thairof  eatis 
vp  in  the  pronouncing  euin  the  vther  fyllabes,  quhilks  ar 
placit  lang  in  the  fame  word,  and  thairfore  fpilhs  the 
flowing  of  that  lyne.  As  for  exemple,  in  this  word, 
Arabia^  the  fecond  fyllable(r^)  is  fa  lang,  that  it  eatis 
vp  in  the  prononcing  \ci\  quhilk  is  the  hinmeR  fyllabe 
of  the  fame  word.  Quhilk  \a'\  althocht  it  be  in  a  lang 
place,  zit  it  kythis  not  fa,  becaufe  of  the  great  lenth  of 
the  preceding  fyllable  {rd).  As  to  the  caufe  quhy  ze 
fall  not  put  a  lang  word  hinmefl  in  the  lyne.  It  is,  be- 
caufe, that  the  lenth  of  the  fecound  fyllabe  {I'o)  eating 
vp  the  lenth  of  the  vther  lang  fyllabe,  \a\  makis  it  to 
ferue  bot  as  a  tayle  vnto  it,  together  with  the  fhort 
fyllabe  preceding.  And  becaufe  this  tayle  nather  fer- 
uis  for  cuUour  nor  fute,  as  I  fpak  before,  it  man  be 
thairfore  repetit  in  the  nixt  lyne  ryming  vnto  it,  as  it 
is  fet  doune  in  the  firfl :  quhilk  makis,  that  ze  will 
(carcely  get  many  wordis  to  ryme  vnto  it,  zea,  nane  at 
all  will  ze  finde  to  ryme  to  fmdrie  vther  langer  wordis. 
Thairfore  cheifly  be  warre  of  inferting  fic  lang  wordis 
hinmefl  in  the  lyne,  for  the  caufe  quhilk  I  lafl  allegit. 
Befydis  that  nather  firft  nor  lafL  in  the  lyne,  it  keipis 
na  Flowing.  The  reulis  and  cautelis  quhairof  are 
thir,  as  followis. 


CHAP.    11. 


IRST,  ze  man  vnderfland  that  all  fyllabis 
are  deuydit  in  thrie  kindes :  That  is, 
fome  fchort,  fome  lang,  and  fome  indiffer- 
ent. Be  indifferent  I  meane,  they  quhilk 
ere  ather  lang  or  fhort,  according  as  ze 
place  thame. 

The  forme  of  placeing  fyllabes  in  verfe,  is  this. 
That  zour  firfl  fyllabe  in  the  lyne  be  fliort,  the 
fecond  lang,  the  thrid  fhort,  the  fourt  lang,  the  fyft 
fhort,  the  fixt  lang,  and  fa  furth  to  the  end  of  the 
lyne.     Alwayis  tak  held,  that  the  nomber  of  zour  fete 


V 


OF     S  C  O  T  T  I  S     P  O  E  S  I  E.  59 

in  euery  l}Tie  be  euin,  and  nocht  odde  :  as  four,  fix, 
aucht,  or  ten  :  and  not  thrie,  fyne,  feuin,  or  nyne, 
except  it  be  in  broken  verfe,  quhilkis  are  out  of  reul  and 
daylie  inuentit  be  dyuers  Poetis.  Bot  gif  ze  wald  afk 
me  the  reulis,  quhairby  to  knaw  euerie  ane  of  thir  thre 
foirfaidis  kyndis  of  fyllabes,  I  anfwer,  Zour  eare  man 
be  the  onely  iudge  and  difcerner  thairof.  And  to 
proue  this,  I  remit  to  the  iudgement  of  the  fame, 
quhilk  of  thir  twa  lynis  following  flowis  befl, 

c>  —      <j        —         u        —  \j  —     ^         — 

/nfo  the  Sea  then  Lucifer  vpjpraiig. 

Ifi  the  Sea  then  Lucifer  to  zf prang. 

I  doubt  not  bot  zour  eare  makkis  zou  eafilie  to 
perfaue,  that  the  firfl  lyne  flowis  w^eil,  and  the  vther 
nathing  at  all.  The  reafoun  is,  becaufe  the  firfl 
lyne  keips  the  reule  abone  written,  to  wit,  the  firfl 
fute  fliort,  the  fecound  lang,  and  fa  furth,  as  I  fhewe 
before  :  quhair  as  the  vther  is  direct  contrair  to  the 
fame.  Bot  fpecially  tak  heid,  quhen  zour  lyne  is  of 
fourtene,  that  zour  SeHionn  in  aucht  be  a  lang  mono- 
fyllabe,  or  ellis  the  hinmefl  fyllabe  of  a  word  alwais 
being  lang,  as  I  faid  before.  The  caufe  quhy  it  man 
be  ane  of  thir  twa,  is,  for  the  Mufique,  becaufe  that 
quhen  zour  lyne  is  ather  of  xiiij  or  xij  fete,  it  wilbe 
drawin  fa  lang  in  the  finging,  as  ze  man  reft  in  the 
middes  of  it,  quhilk  is  the  Sedioim :  fa  as,  gif  zour 
Seclioiin  be  nocht  ather  a  monofyllabe,  or  ellis  the 
hinmeft  fyllabe  of  a  word,  as  I  faid  before,  bot  the 
firft  fyllabe  of  a  polyfyllabe,  the  Mufique  fall  make  zow 
fa  to  reft  in  the  middes  of  that  word,  as  it  fall  cut  the 
ane  half  of  the  word  fra  the  vther,  and  fa  fall  mak  it 
feme  twa  different  wordis,  that  is  bot  ane.  This  aucht 
onely  to  be  obferuit  in  thir  foirfaid  lang  lynis :  for 
the  fliortnes  of  all  fhorter  lynis,  then  thir  before  men- 
tionat,  is  the  caufe,  that  the  Mufique  makis  na  reft 
in  the  middes  of  thame,  and  thairfore  thir  obfeniationis 


6o  REVLIS     AND     CAVETLIS 

feruis  nocht  for  thame.  Onely  tak  heid,  that  the 
Se&ioun  in  thame  kythe  fomething  langer  nor  any 
vther  feit  in  that  lyne,  except  the  fecound  and  the  lafl, 
as  I  haue  faid  before. 

Ze  man  tak  heid  lykewayis,  that  zour  langefl  lynis 
exceid  nochte  fourtene  fete,  and  that  zour  shortefl  be 
nocht  within  foure. 

Remember  alfo  to  mak  a  SeBioiin  in  the  middes  of 
euery  lyne,  quhether  the  lyne  be  lang  or  fhort.  Be 
Sedioim  I  mean,  that  gif  zour  lyne  be  of  fourtene  fete, 
zour  aucht  fute,  man  not  only  be  langer  then  the 
feuint,  or  vther  fhort  fete,  but  alfo  langer  nor  any 
vther  lang  fete  in  the  fame  lyne,  except  the  fecound 
and  the  hinmeft.  Or  gif  your  lyne  be  of  twelf  fete,  zour 
Se^ioun  to  be  in  the  fext.  Or  gif  of  ten,  zour  Se^ioun 
to  be  in  the  fext  alfo.  The  caufe  quhy  it  is  not  in 
fyue,  is,  becaufe  fyue  is  odde,  and  euerie  odde  fute 
is  fhort.  Or  gif  your  lyne  be  of  aucht  fete,  zour 
Sedioim  to  be  in  the  fourt.  Gif  of  fex,  in  the  fourt 
alfo.     Gif  of  four,  zour  Se^ioun  to  be  in  twa. 

Ze  aucht  like  wife  be  war  with  oft  compofmg 
zour  haill  lynis  of  monofyllabis  onely,  (albeit  our 
language  haue  fa  many,  as  we  can  nocht  weill  efchewe 
it)  becaufe  the  maift  pairt  of  thame  are  indifferent, 
and  may  be  in  fhort  or  lang  place,  as  ze  like.  Some 
wordis  of  dyuers  fyllabis  are  likewayis  indifferent,  as 

Thairfore^  rejlore. 

I  thairfore,  theft. 

In  the  firft,  thairfore,  {thair)  is  fhort,  and  (fore)  is 
lang  :  In  the  vther,  {thair)  is  lang,  and  (fore)  is  fhort, 
and  zit  baith  fiowis  alike  weill.  Bot  thir  indifferent 
wordis,  compofit  of  dyuers  fyllabes,  are  rare,  fuppofe 
in  monofyllabes,  commoun.  The  caufe  then,  quhy 
ane  haill  lyne  aucht  nocht  to  be  compofit  of  mono- 
fyllabes only,  is,  that  they  being  for  the  maift  pairt 
indifferent,  nather  the  fecound,  hinmefl,  nor  SeBioun, 
will  be  langer  nor  the  other  lang  fete  in  the  fame  lyne. 


OF     S  C  O  T  T  I  S     P  O  E  S  I  E.  6i 

Thairfore  ze  man  place  a  word  compofit  of  dyuers 
fyllabes,  and  not  indifferent,  ather  in  the  fecound, 
hinmefl,  or  Se^ioini,  or  in  all  thrie. 

Ze  man  alfo  tak  heid,  that  quhen  thare  fallis  any 
(hort  fyllabis  efter  the  lad  lang  fyllabe  in  the  lyne, 
that  ze  repeit  thame  in  the  lyne  quhilk  rymis  to  the 
vther,  even  as  ze  fet  them  downe  in  the  firfl  lyne :  as 
for  exempill,  ze  man  not  fay 

T/ie?i  feir  nocht 
Nor  heir  ocJit. 

Bot 

Then  feir  nocht 
Nor  heir  nocht. 

Repeting  the  fame,  7tochf^  in  baith  the  lynis  :  becaufe 
this  fyllabe,  nocht,  nather  feruing  for  cullour  nor  fute, 
is  bot  a  tayle  to  the  lang  fute  preceding,  and  thairfore 
is  repetit  lykewayis  in  the  nixt  lyne,  quhilk  rymes  vnto 
it,  euin  as  it  fet  doun  in  the  firft. 

There  is  alfo  a  kynde  of  indifferent  wordis,  afweill 
as  of  fyllabis,  albeit  few  in  nomber.  The  nature  quhair- 
of  is,  that  gif  ze  place  thame  in  the  begynning  of  a 
lyne,  they  are  fhorter  be  a  fute,  nor  they  are,  gif  ze 
place  thame  hinmefl  in  the  lyne,  as 

Sen  patience  I  man  hatie  perforce. 
I  line  in  hope  with  patience. 

Ze  fe  there  are  bot  aucht  fete  in  ather  of  baith  thir 
lynis  aboue  written.  The  caufe  quhairof  is,  that 
patiejice,  in  the  firfl  lyne,  in  refpe6l  it  is  in  the  be- 
ginning thairof,  is  bot  of  twa  fete,  and  in  the  lafl  lyne, 
of  thric,  in  refpedl  it  is  the  hinmefl  word  of  that  lyne. 
To  knaw  and  difcerne  thir  kynde  of  wordis  from 
vtheris,  zour  eare  man  be  the  onely  iudge,  as  of  all  the 
vther  parts  of  Flowing,  the  verie  twicheflane  quhair- 
of is  Mufique. 

I  haue  teachit  zow  now  fhortly  the  reulis  of  Ryming, 


62 


REVLIS     AND     CAVTELIS 


Fete,  and  Flowing.  There  rellis  yet  to  teache  zow  the 
wordis,  fentences,  and  phrafis  neceffair  for  a  Poete  to 
vfe  in  his  verfe,  quhilk  I  haue  fet  doun  in  reuUs,  as 
efter  followis. 


CHAP.    III. 


Irfl,  that  in  quhatfumeuer  ze  put  in  verfe, 
ze  put  in  na  wordis,  ather  metri  caufa,  or 
zit,  for  fining  furth  the  nomber  of  the 
fete,  bot  that  they  be  all  fa  neceffare,  as 
ze  fould  be  conftrainit  to  vfe  thame,  in 
cace  ze  were  fpeiking  the  fame  purpofe  in  profe. 
And  thairfore  that  zour  wordis  appeare  to  haue  cum 
out  willingly,  and  by  nature,  and  not  to  haue  bene 
thrawin  out  conflrainedly,  be  compulfioun. 

That  ze  efchew  to  infert  in  zour  verfe,  a  lang  rable 
of  mennis  names,  or  names  of  tounis,  or  fik  vther 
names.  Becaufe  it  is  hard  to  mak  many  lang  names 
all  placit  together,  to  flow  weill.  Thairfore  quhen 
that  fallis  out  in  zour  purpofe,  ze  fall  ather  put  bot 
twa  or  thrie  of  thame  in  euerie  lyne,  mixing  vther 
wordis  amang  thame,  or  ellis  fpecifie  bot  twa  or  thre 
of  them  at  all,  faying  {With  the  laif  of  that  race)  or 
(  With  the  rest  in  thay  pairtis,)  or  fic  vther  lyke  wordis : 
as  for  example, 

Otit  through  his  cairt,  qichair  Eous  was  eik 
With  other  thre,  quhilk  Phaeton  had  dj-avvin. 

Ze  fie  thair  is  bot  ane  name  there  fpecifeit,  to  ferue 
for  vther  thrie  of  that  forte. 

Ze  man  alfo  take  heid  to  frame  zour  wordis  and 
fentencis  according  to  the  mater :  As  in  Flyting 
and  Inue6liues,  zour  wordis  to  be  cuttit  fhort,  and 
hurland  ouer  heuch.  For  thais  quhilkis  are  cuttit  (hort, 
I  meane  be  fic  wordis  as  thir. 


OF     S  C  O  T  T  1  S      P  O  E  S  I  E.  63 

lis  iieir  cair^ 
for 

/  fall  7ieiier  cair,  gif  zour  fubiedl 
were  of  loue,  or  tragedies.  Becaufe  in  thame  zour 
words  man  be  drawin  lang,  quhilkis  in  Flyting  man 
be  fhort. 

Ze  man  lykewayis  tak  heid,  the  ze  waill  zour  wordis 
according  to  the  purpofe  :  As,  in  ane  heich  and  leamit 
purpofe,  to  vfe  heich,  pithie,  and  learnit  wordis. 

Gif  zour  purpofe  be  of  loue.  To  vfe  commoun  lan- 
guage, with  fome  paffionate  wordis. 

Gif  zour  purpofe  be  of  tragicall  materis,  To  vfe 
lamentable  wordis,  with  fome  heich,  as  rauifliit  in 
admiratioun. 

Gif  zour  purpofe  be  of  landwart  effairis.  To  vfe  cor- 
ruptit  and  vplandis  wordis. 

And  finally,  quhatfumeuer  be  zour  fubie6l,  to  vfe 
vocabula  artis,  quhairby  ze  may  the  mair  viuelie  repre- 
fent  that  perfoun,  quhais  pairt  ze  paint  out. 

This  is  likewayis  neidfuU  to  be  vfit  in  fentences,  als 
Weill  as  in  wordis.  As  gif  zour  fubie6l  be  heich  and 
learnit,  to  vfe  leamit  and  infallible  reafonis,  prouin  be 
neceffities. 

Gif  zour  fubie6l  be  of  loue.  To  vfe  wilfull  reafonis, 
proceding  rather  from  paffioun,  nor  reafoun. 

Gif  zour  fabiecl  be  of  landwart  effaris.  To  vfe 
fklender  reafonis,  mixt  with  groffe  ignorance,  nather 
keiping  forme  nor  ordour.  And  fa  furth,  euer  framing 
zour  reafonis,  according  to  the  qualitie  of  zour  fubiecfl. 

Let  all  zour  verfe  be  Literally  fa  far  as  may  be, 
quhatfumeuer  kynde  they  be  of,  botfpeciallie  Tu?nbli?7g 
verfe  for  flyting.  Be  Litej-all  I  meane,  that  the  maifl 
pairt  of  zour  lyne,  fall  rynne  vpon  a  letter,  as  this 
tumbling  lyne  rynnis  vpon  F. 

Fetching  fude  for  to  feid  it  fast  furth  of  the  Farie. 

Ze  man  obferue  that  thir  Tumbling  verfe  flowis  not 
on  that  faffoun,  as  vtheris  dois.  For  all  vthcris  keipis 
the  reule  quhilk  I  gaue  before,  To  wit,  the  firll  fute 
fiiort  the  fecound  lang,  and  fa  furth.     Quhair  as  thir 


64  REVLIS     AND     CAVTELIS 

hes  twa  fliort,  and  ane  lang  throuch  all  the  lyne,  quhen 
they  keip  ordour  :  albeit  the  maifl  pairt  of  thame  be 
out  of  ordour,  and  keipis  na  kynde  nor  reule  oi  Flowing, 
and  for  that  caufe  are  callit  Timibling  verfe  :  except 
the  fhort  lynis  of  aucht  in  the  hinder  end  of  the  verfe, 
the  quhilk  flowis  as  vther  verfes  dois,  as  ze  will  find  in 
the  hinder  end  of  this  buke,  quhair  I  gaue  exemple  of 
findrie  kyndis  of  verfis. 


CHAP.    nil. 

ARK  alfo  thrie  fpeciall  ornamentis  to  verfe, 
quhilkis  are,  Comparifons,  Epithetis,  and 
Proiierbis. 

As  for  Cojnparifons^  take  heid  that  they 
be  fa  proper  for  the  fubiedl,  that  nather 
they  be  ouer  bas,  gif  zour  fubiedl  be  heich,  for  then 
fould  zour  fubiedt  SjComparifoiin}\  difgrace  zour  Com- 
parifoun  [fubje6t?],  nather  zour  Comparifoun  be  heich 
quhen  zour  fubie6l  is  baffe,  for  then  fall  zour  Compari- 
foim  [fubjedl?]  difgrace  your  fubie6l  \Comparifoim'>\ 
Bot  let  fic  a  mutuall  correfpondence  and  fimilitude  be 
betwix  them,  as  it  may  appeare  to  be  a  meit  Co7iipari- 
foun  for  fic  a  fubiecfl,  and  fa  fall  they  ilkane  decore 
vther. 

As  for  Epithetis^  It  is  to  defcryue  brieflie,  en  paffant, 
the  naturall  of  euerie  thing  ze  fpeik  of,  be  adding  the 
proper  adie6liue  vnto  it,  quhairof  there  are  twa  faffons. 
The  ane  is,  to  defcryue  it,  be  making,  a  corruptit  worde, 
compofit  of  twa  dyuers  fimple  wordis,  as 
Apollo  gyde-Siin7ie 
The  vther  faffon,  is,  be  Circumlocution,  as 

Apollo  reular  of  the  Siinne. 
I  efleme  this  lall  faffoun  befl,  Becaufe  it  expreffis 
the  authoris  meaning  als  weill  as  the  vther,  and  zit 
makis  na  corruptit  wordis,  as  the  vther  dois. 

As  for  the  Frouerbis,  they  man  be  proper  for  the 
fubiedt,  to  beautifie  it,  chofen  in  the  fame  forme  as  the 
Comparifoun. 


OF     SCOTTIS     POESIE.  65 


CHAP    V. 

jT  is  alfo  meit,  for  the  better  decoratioun  of 
the  verfe  to  vfe  fumtyme  the  figure  of 
Repetitioun,  as 

Qiihylis  toy  rang^ 
Qichylis  noy  rang.  d^c. 

Ze  fie  this  word  quhylis  is  repetit  heir.  This  forme 
of  repetitioun  fometyme  vfit,  decoris  the  verfe  very 
mekle.  zea  quhen  it  cummis  to  purpofe,  it  will  be 
cumly  to  repete  fie  a  word  aucht  or  nyne  tymes  in  a 
verfe. 

CHAP.    VI. 

ZE  man  alfo  be  warre  with  compofing  ony  thing 
in  the  fame  maner,  as  lies  bene  ower  oft  vfit  of 
before.  As  in  fpeciall,  gif  ze  fpeik  of  loue,  be 
warre  ze  defcr}aie  zour  Zones  makdome,  or  her  fairnes. 
And  ficlyke  that  ze  defcryue  not  the  morning,  and  ryfing 
of  the  Sunne,  in  the  Preface  of  zour  verfe :  for  thir 
thingis  are  fa  oft  and  dyuerflie  writtin  vpon  be  Poetis 
already,  that  gif  ze  do  the  lyke,  it  will  appeare,  ze  bot 
imitate,  and  that  it  cummis  not  of  zour  awin  Lmentioiin^ 
quhilk  is  ane  of  the  cheif  properteis  of  ane  Poete. 
Thairfore  gif  zour  fubie6l  be  to  prayfe  zour  Loiie^  ze 
fall  rather  prayfe  hir  vther  qualiteis,  nor  her  fairnes,  or 
hir  fhaip  :  or  ellis  ze  fall  fpeik  fome  lytill  thing  of  it, 
and  fyne  fay,  that  zour  wittis  are  fa  final,  and  zour 
vtterance  fa  barren,  that  ze  can  not  difcryue  any  part 
of  hir  worthelie  :  remitting  alwayis  to  the  Reider,  to 
iudge  of  hir,  in  refpecl  flio  matches,  or  rather  excellis 
Venus,  or  any  woman,  quhome  to  it  fall  pleafe  zow  to 
compaire  her.  Bot  gif  zour  fubie6t  be  fie,  as  ze  man 
fpeik  fome  thing  of  the  morning,  or  Sunne  ryfing,  tak 
heid,  that  quhat  name  ze  giue  to  the  Sunne,  the  Mone, 
or  vther  flarris,  the  ane  tyme,  gif  ze  happin  to  wryte 

E 


66  REVLIS    AND    CAVTELIS 

thairof  another  tyme,  to  change  thair  names.  As  gif  ze 
call  the  Sunne  Titan,  at  a  tyme,  to  call  him  Phoebus  or 
Apollo  the  vther  tyme,  and  ficlyke  the  Mone,  and  vther 
Planettis. 

CHAP.    VII. 

jOT  fen  Imiention,  is  ane  of  the  cheif  vertewis 
in  a  Poete,  it  is  befl  that  ze  inuent  zour 
awin  fubiedl,  zour  felf,  and  not  to  com- 
pofe  of  fen  e  fubie6lis.  Efpecially,  tranflat- 
ing  any  thing  out  of  vther  language,  quhilk 
doing,  ze  not  onely  effay  not  zour  awin  ingyne  of  Iniien- 
tioim,  bot  be  the  fame  meanes,  ze  are  bound,  as  to  a 
flaik,  to  follow  that  buikis  phrafis,  quhilk  ze  tranflate. 
Ze  man  alfo  be  war  of  wryting  any  thing  of  materis 
of  commoun  weill,  or  vther  fic  graue  fene  fubiedlis 
(except  Metaphorically,  of  manifefl  treuth  opinly 
knavvin,  zit  nochtwithftanding  vfmg  it  very  feindil)  be- 
caufe  nocht  onely  ze  effay  nocht  zour  awin  Inuentioun, 
as  I  fpak  before,  bot  lykewayis  they  are  to  graue 
materis,  for  a  Poet  to  mell  in.  Bot  becaufe  ze  can  not 
haue  the  Inuenimm,  except  it  come  of  Nature,  I  remit 
it  thairvnto,  as  the  cheif  caufe,  not  onely  of  Imtentioun^ 
bot  alfo  of  all  the  vther  pairtis  of  Poefie.  For  airt  is 
onely  bot  ane  help  and  a  remembraunce  to  Nature,  as 
I  fhewe  zow  in  the  Preface. 

CHAP.  VIII.  tuiching  the  kyndis  of  verfis, 
mentionat  in  the  Preface. 

[Irfl,  there  is  ryme  quhilk  feruis  onely  for 
lang  hifloreis,  and  zit  are  nocht  verfe  As 
for  exemple, 

InMaiivvhenthatthebliffefiLllPhoehusbricht^ 
The  lamp  ofioy,  the  heaiiens  gemme  of  licht, 
Thegoldin  cairt,  and  the  etheriall  King, 
With  piirponr  face  in  Orient  dois  fpi'ing, 
Maifl  angel-lyke  afcending  in  his  fphere, 
And  birds  with  all  thair  heauenlie  voces  cleare 


OF     SCOTTIS     POESIE.  67 

Dots  mak  a  fvveit  a7id  /tea n inly  /iar??io?iy, 
And  fragrant  Jlours  dois  fprifig  vp  lujlely : 
Into  this  feafonfvveitejl  of  delyte, 
To  walk  I  had  a  lusty  appctyte. 

And  fa  furth. 

T  For  the  defcriptioim  of  Heroique  a6lis,  Martiall 
and  knichtly  faittis  of  amies,  vfe  this  kynde  of  verfe 
following,  callit  Heroically  As 

Meik  mundane  mirrour^  viyrrie  and  niodefl^ 
Blyth,  kynde,  and  courtes,  cornel ie,  cle?ie,  and  chef? y 

To  all  exemplefor  thy  honeflie^ 
As  richefl  rofe,  or  ruble,  by  the  refl, 

With  gracis  g?'aue,  and  gesture  maifl  digefl, 
Ay  to  thy  hoimour  alwayis  hailing  eye. 

Were  fafso?is  fiiejnde,  they  7?iicht  be  found  in  the : 
Of  bliffings  all,  be  blyth,  thovv  hes  the  befly 

With  aierie  ber?ie  belouit  for  to  be. 

T  For  any  heich  and  graue  fubie6lis,  fpecially  drawin 
out  of  learnit  authouris,  vfe  this  kynde  of  verfe  follow- 
ing, callit  Ballat  Royal,  as 

That  nicht  he  ceifl,  and  went  to  bed,  bot  greind 
Zit  faflfor  day,  and  thocht  the  nicht  to  lang  : 
At  lafl  Diana  doim  her  head  recleiiid, 
Into  the  fea.      The7i  Lucifer  vpf prang, 
Auroras  pofl,  vvhomefJio  did  fend  amang 
The  leittie  cludds,for  to  foretell  ane  hour. 
Before  fJio  flay  her  tears,  quhilk  Ouide  fang 
Fell  for  her  loue,  quhilk  turnit  ifi  a  flour. 

T  For  tragicall  materis,  complaintis,  or  tellamentis,  vfe 
this  kynde  of  verfe  following,  callit  Troilus  verfe,  as 

To  thee  Echo,  and  thovv  to  7ne  agane, 
In  the  defert,  a77ia7tgs  the  vvods  a7id  vvellsy 
Quhair  defli7iie  hes  bound  the  to  re77ia7ie. 
But  C077ipa7iy,  vvithi7i  the  firths  a7id  fells, 
Ltt  vs  C077iplei7i,  with  wofull  zoutts  a7id  zells, 


68  REVLIS    AND    CAVTELIS 

AJIiaff,  ajiwtter,  that  our  harts  hes  flam  : 
To  thee  Echo,  and  thovv  to  me  agane. 

T  For  flyting,  or  Inuediues,  vfe  this  kynde  of  verfe 
following,  callit  Roimcefallis,  or  Tumbling  verfe. 

In  the  hinder  e?id  of  haruest  vpon  Alhallovv  ene, 
Qiihen  our  gude  nichtbors  rydis  {nou  gif  I  reid  richt) 
Some  bucklit  on  a  benvvod,  and jfome  on  a  bene, 
Ay  trott  and  into  troupes  fra  the  tvvylicht : 
Some  fadland  aJJio  ape,  all  grathed  into  grene: 
Some  hotche  and  on  a  hemp  flalk,  hovand  on  a  heicht. 
The  king  of  Far y  with  the  Court  of  the  Elf  quene, 
With  many  eh-age  Incubus  rydand  that  nicht : 
There  ane  elf  on  ane  ape  ane  vnfell  begat : 
Befyde  a  pot  baith  auld  and  vvorne. 
This  bratshard  in  ane  bus  was  borne : 
They  f and  a  monfler  on  the  morne, 
VVar  facit  nor  a  Cat. 

^  For  compendious  prayfmg  of  any  bukes,  or  the 
authouris  thairof,  or  ony  argumentis  of  vther  hiftoreis, 
quhair  fundrie  fentences,  and  change  of  purpofis  are 
requyrit,  vfe  Sonet  verfe,  of  fourtene  lynis,  and  ten  fete 
in  euery  lyne.  The  exemple  quhairof,  I  neid  nocht 
to  fhaw  zow,  in  refpe6l  I  haue  fet  doun  twa  in  the  be- 
ginning of  tliis  treatife. 

*r  In  materis  of  loue,  vfe  this  kynde  of  verfe,  quhilk 
we  call  Cojnmoun  verfe,  as 

Qiihais  anfvver  made  thame  nocht  fa  glaid 
That  they  fould  thus  the  villors  be, 
As  euen  the  anfwer  quhilk  I  haid 
Did  greatly  ioy  and  confort  me: 
Quhen  lo,  this  fpak  Apollo  niyjie, 
All  that  thoufeikis,  it  fall  be  thyne. 

^  Lyke  verfe  of  ten  fete,  as  this  foirfaid  is  of  aucht,  ze 
may  vfe  lykewayis  in  loue  materis  :  as  alfo  all  kyndis 
of  cuttit  and  brokin  verfe,  quhairof  new  formes  are 
daylie  inuentit  according  to  the  Poetes  pleafour,  as 


OF    SCOTTIS     rOESIE.  69 

QuJia  vvald  haue  tyrde  to  heir  that  tone, 
QuJiilk  birds  corroborat  ay  abone 

Throuch  fchouting  of  the  Larkis  1 
They  f prang  fa  heich  into  thejkyes 
Qichill  Cupide  vvalhiis  with  the  cryis 

Of  Nat ur is  chapell  Clarkis. 
Then  leaning  all  the  Heaiiins  aboue 

He  lichted  on  the  eard. 
Lo!  how  that  lytill  God  of  loue. 

Before  me  then  appeard^ 
So  myld-lyke 

With  bow  thre  quarters  fkant 
And  chyld-Iyke 

So  vioylie 

He  lukit  lyke  a  Sant. 
And  coy  lie 

And  fa  furth. 

T  This  onely  kynde  of  brokin  verfe  abonewrittin, 
man  of  neceffitie,  in  thir  lafl  fhort  fete,  as  7^  moylie  and 
coylie,  haue  bot  twa  fete  and  a  tayle  to  ilkane  of  thame, 
as  ze  fie,  to  gar  the  cullour  and  ryme  be  in  the  penult 
fyllabe. 

T  And  of  thir  foirfaidis  kyndes  of  ballatis  of  haill 

verfe,  and  not  cuttit  or  brokin  as  this  lafl  is,  gif  ze 

lyke  to  put  ane  owenvord  till  ony  of  thame,  as  making 

the  lafl  lyne  of  the  firfl  verfe,  to  be  the  laft  lyne  of  euerie 

vther  verfe  in  thatballat,  will  fet  weill  for  loue  materis. 

Bot  befydis   thir  kyndes   of  brokin   or   cuttit   verfe, 

quhilks  ar  inuentit  daylie  be  Poetis,  as  I  fhewe  before, 

there  are  fmdrie  kyndes  of  haill  verfe,  with  all  thair  lynis 

alyke  lang,  quhilk  I  haue  heir  omittit,  and  tane  bot 

onelie  thir  few  kyndes  abone  fpecifeit 

as  the  befl,  quhilk  may  be  ap- 

plyit  to  ony  kynde  of 

fubie6t, 

bot  rather  to  thir,  quhairof 

I  haue  fpokin  before. 


•5'f 


THE  CIIII.   PSALME, 

TRANSLATED  OVT  OF 
TREMELLIVS. 

PSALME    CIIII. 

Lord  infpyre  my  fpreit  and  pen,  to  praife 
i^l\     Thy  Name,  whofe  greatnes  farr  furpaffis  all : 
^     That  fyne,  I  may  thy  gloir  and  honour  blaife, 
Which  cleithis  the  ouer :  about  the  lyke  a  wall 
The  light  remainis.     O  thow,  whofe  charge  and  call 
Made  Heauens  lyke  courtenis  for  to  fpred  abreid, 
Who  bowed  the  waters  fo,  as  ferue  they  Ihall 
For  criflall  fyilring  ouer  thy  houfe  to  gleid. 

Who  walks  vpon  the  wings  of  reftles  winde. 
Who  of  the  clouds  his  chariot  made,  euen  he. 
Who  in  his  prefence  flill  the  fpreits  doeth  find, 
Ay  ready  to  fulfill  ilk  iuft  decrie 
Of  his,  whofe  feruants  fyre  and  flammis  they  be. 
Who  fet  the  earth  on  her  fundations  fure, 
So  as  her  brangling  none  fhall  euer  fee  : 
Who  at  thy  charge  the  deip  vpon  her  bure. 

So,  as  the  very  tops  of  mountains  hie 

Be  fluidis  were  onis  ouerflowed  at  thy  command, 

Ay  whill  thy  thundring  voice  fone  made  them  flie 

Ower  hiddeous  hills  and  hov/es,  till  noght  but  fand 

Was  left  behind,  fyne  with  thy  mightie  hand 

Thow  limits  made  vnto  the  roring  deip. 

So  fhall  fhe  neuer  droun  againe  the  land. 

But  brek  her  wawes  on  rockis,  her  mairch  to  keip. 

Thir  are  thy  workis,  who  maid  the  ftrands  to  breid, 
Syne  rinn  among  the  hills  from  fountains  cleir, 


I 


rS  ALME    C  I  I  I  I.  71 

\Miairto  A\7ld  Affes  oft  dois  rinn  with  fpeid, 
With  vther  beafls  to  drinkc.     Hard  by  we  heir 
The  chirping  birds  among  the  leaues,  with  beir 
To  fing,  whil  all  the  rocks  about  rebounde. 
A  woundrous  worke,  that  thow,  6  Father  deir, 
Maks  throtts  fo  fmall  yeild  furth  fo  greate  a  founde  ! 

O  thow  who  from  thy  palace  oft  letts  fall 
(For  to  refrefh  the  hills)  thy  bleffed  raine  : 
Who  with  thy  works  mainteins  the  earth  and  all : 
Who  maks  to  grow  the  herbs  and  grafs  to  gaine. 
The  herbs  for  foode  to  man,  grafs  dois  remaine 
For  food  to  horfe,  and  cattell  of  all  kynde. 
Thow  caufefl  them  not  pull  at  it  in  vaine, 
But  be  thair  foode.  fuch  is  thy  will  and  mynde. 

Who  dois  reioyfe  the  hart  of  man  with  wyne, 

And  who  with  oyle  his  face  maks  cleir  and  bright, 

And  who  with  foode  his  {lomack  flrengthnes  fyne, 

Who  nurifhes  the  very  treis  aright. 

The  Cedars  evin  of  Liban  tall  and  wight 

He  planted  hath,  w^here  birds  do  bigg  their  nefl. 

He  maid  the  Firr  treis  of  a  woundrous  hight, 

Where  Storks  dois  mak  thair  dwelling  place,  and  refl. 

Thow  made  the  barren  hills,  wylde  goats  refuge. 
Thow  maid  the  rocks,  a  refidence  and  refl 
For  Alpin  ratts,  where  they  doe  hue  and  ludge. 
Thow  maid  the  Moone,  her  courfe,  as  thou  thoght  bed. 
Thow  maid  the  Siume  in  tyme  go  to,  that  led 
He  dill  fould  fliyne,  then  night  fould  neuer  come. 
But  thow  in  ordour  all  things  hes  fo  dred. 
Some  beads  for  day,  for  night  are  alfo  fome. 

For  Lyons  young  at  night  beginnis  to  raire, 
And  from  their  denns  to  craue  of  God  fome  pray  : 
Then  in  the  morning,  gone  is  all  their  caire, 
And  homeward  to  their  caues  rinnis  fad,  fra  day 
Beginne  to  kythe,  the  Sunne  dois  fo  them  fray. 


1 


I 


72 


PSALME    cm  I. 


Then  man  gois  furth,  fra  tyme  the  Sunne  dois  ryfe. 
And  whill  the  euening  he  remanis  away 
At  lefume  labour,  where  his  lining  lyes. 

How  large  and  mightie  are  thy  workis,  6  Lord  ! 
And  with  what  wifedome  are  they  wrought,  but  faile. 
The  earths  great  fulnes,  of  thy  gifts  recorde 
Dois  beare  :  Heirof  the  Seas  (which  dyuers  fkaile 
Of  fifh  contenis)  dois  witnes  beare  :  Ilk  faile 
Of  dyuers  fhips  vpon  the  fwolling  wawes 
Dois  teflifie,  as  dois  the  monflrous  whaile, 
Who  frayis  all  fiflies  with  his  ravening  lawes. 

All  thir  (6  Lord)  yea  all  this  woundrous  heape 
Of  lining  things,  in  feafon  craues  their  fill 
Of  foode  from  thee.  Thow  giuing,  Lord,  they  reape  : 
Thy  open  hand  with  gude  things  fills  them  flill 
When  fo  thow  lift  :  but  contrar,  when  thow  will 
Withdraw  thy  face,  then  are  they  troubled  fair, 
Their  breath  by  thee  receavd,  fone  dois  them  kill : 
Syne  they  return e  into  their  afhes  bair. 

But  notwithflanding,  Father  deare,  in  cace 

Thow  breath  on  them  againe,  then  they  reviue. 

In  fhort,  thow  dois,  6  Lord,  renewe  the  face 

Of  all  the  earth,  and  all  that  in  it  Hue. 

Therefore  immortall  praife  to  him  we  giue  : 

Let  him  reioyfe  into  his  works  he  maid, 

Whofe  looke  and  touche,  fo  hills  and  earth  dois  greiue, 

As  earth  dois  tremble,  mountains  reikis,  afraid. 

To  lehoua  I  all  my  lyfe  fliall  fing. 
To  found  his  Name  I  euer  flill  fliall  cair  : 
It  fliall  be  fweit  my  thinking  on  that  King  : 
In  him  I  fhall  be  glaid  for  euer  mair  : 
O  let  the  wicked  be  into  no  whair 
In  earth.     O  let  the  finfull  be  deftroyde. 
Bleffe  him  my  foule  who  name  lehoua  bair  : 
O  bleffe  him  now  with  notts  that  are  enioydc. 

Hallelu-iah. 


ANE  SCHORT  POEME 

OF    TYME. 


vf"    vp    tF 
# 


yA  cS  I  was  panfing  in  a  morning,  aire, 

Ai\_     And  could  not  fleip,  nor  nawayis  take  me  refl, 

^^^     Furth  for  to  walk,  the  morning  was  fa  faire, 

Athort  the  feilds,  it  famed  to  me  the  befl. 

The  £a/l  was  cleare,  whereby  belyue  I  gefl 

That  fyrie  Ti/an  cumming  was  in  fight, 

Obfcuring  chafL  Diana  by  his  light. 

Who  by  his  rj'fmg  in  the  Azure  fl^yes, 
Did  dewlie  helfe  all  thame  on  earth  do  dwell. 
The  balmie  dew  through  biming  drouth  he  dryis, 
Which  made  the  foile  to  fauour  fweit  and  fmell, 
By  dewe  that  on  the  night  before  downe  fell, 
Which  then  was  foukit  by  the  Delphienns  heit 
Vp  in  the  aire :  it  was  fo  light  and  weit. 

\Vhofe  hie  afcending  in  his  purpour  Sphere 

Prouoked  all  from  Morpheus  to  flee  : 

As  beafls  to  feid,  and  birds  to  fing  with  beir, 

Men  to  their  labour,  biffie  as  the  Bee : 

Yet  ydle  men  deuyfmg  did  I  fee. 

How  for  to  dryue  the  tyme  that  did  them  irk, 

By  fmdrie  paflymes,  quhill  that  it  grew  mirk. 


74  T  Y  M  E. 

Then  woundred  I  to  fee  them  feik  a  wyle, 
So  wiUinghe  the  precious  tyme  to  tyne : 
And  how  they  did  them  felhs  fo  farr  begyle, 
To  fafhe  of  tyme,  which  of  it  felfe  is  fyne. 
Fra  tyme  be  pafl,  to  call  it  bakwart  fyne 
Is  bot  in  vaine :  therefore  men  fould  be  warr, 
To  fleuth  the  tyme  that  flees  fra  them  fo  farr. 

For  what  hath  man  bot  tyme  into  this  lyfe, 
Which  giues  him  dayis  his  God  aright  to  knaw  : 
Wherefore  then  fould  we  be  at  fic  a  flryfe, 
So  fpedelie  our  felfis  for  to  withdraw 
Euin  from  the  tyme,  which  is  on  nowayes  flaw 
To  flie  from  vs,  fuppofe  we  fled  it  noght  ? 
More  wyfe  we  were,  if  we  the  tyme  had  foght. 

Bot  fen  that  tyme  is  fic  a  precious  thing, 

I  wald  we  fould  bellow  it  into  that 

Which  were  mofl.  pleafour  to  our  heauenly  King. 

Flee  ydilteth,  which  is  the  greatefl  lat. 

Bot  fen  that  death  to  all  is  deflinat, 

Let  vs  imploy  that  time  that  God  hath  fend  vs, 

In  doing  weill,  that  good  men  may  commend  vs. 


HcEC  quoque  perficiat^  quod perjicit  omnia,  Teinpus. 
FINIS. 


75 


A   TABLE   OF   SOME  OBSCVRE 

WORD  IS   WITH    THEIR   S  I  G- 

nificatio7is,  efter  the  ordour  of 

the  Alphabet. 

*  * 

VVordis  Significations 

Ajnmon  lupiter  Ammon. 

Ande  A  village  befyde  Mantua  where 

Virgin  was  borne. 
Alexandria  A  famous  citie  in  Egypt,  where 

was  the  notable  librarie  gathered  by  Ftolomeus  Phila- 

delphiis. 

B 

Bethaniens  fecond  liuing    Lazarus  oiBethania,  who  was 
reuiued  be  ChriR,  reid  lo/m  1 1  Chap. 


Casialia  A  well  at  the  fute  of  the  hill 

Far?iaffus. 

Celce7io  Th e  cheif  of  the  Harpy es,  a  kynde 

of  monflers  mth  wingis  and  womens  faces,  whome 
the  Poets  feynzeis  to  reprefent  theuis. 

Cerberus  The  thrie  headed  porter  of  hell. 

Cinimerien  night  Drevin  from  a  kynd  of  people  in 

the  Eafl,  called  Cif?wierij,  who  are  great  theuis,  and 
dwellis  in  dark  caues,  and  therefore,  fleeping  in 
fmne,  is  called  Cimmerien  night. 

Circider  daiince  The  round  motionis  of  the  Pla- 

nets, and  of  their  heauens,  applyed  to  feuin  findrie 
metallis. 

Clio  One  of  the  Mufes. 

Cypris  The   dwelling   place   of    Venus, 

tearming  continens  pro  contefito. 

Cyprian  torche  Levis  darte. 


76  THETABLE. 

D 

Delphien  Songs  Poemes,  and  verfes,  drawen  from 

the  Oracle  of  Apollo  at  Delphos. 
DircR  Thre  furies  of  hell,  Ale^o,  Me- 

gera^  and  Tefiphone. 
Dodon  A  citie  of  the  kingdome  of  Epi- 

rus,  befydes  the  which,  there  was  a  wood  and  a 

Temple  therein,  confecrated  to  Jupiter. 

E 

EleBre  A  metal,  fowre  parts  gold  and 

fift  part  filuer. 
Elife field  In  Latin  Campi  Elifij,  a  ioy  fall 

place  in  hell,  where  as  the  Poets  feinzeis  all  the 

happie  fpreits  do  remaine. 
Efculape  A  mediciner,  after  made  a  god. 

G 

Greatefi  thunders  lupiter  (as  the  Poets  feinzeia; 
had  two  thunders,  whereof  he  fent  the  greatefl  vpon 
the  Gyants,  who  contemned  him. 

H 

Hermes  An  AEgiptian  Philofopher  foone 

after  the  tyme  of  Moyfes,  confeffed  in  his  Dialogues 
one  onely  God  to  be  Creator  of  all  things,  and  graunt- 
ed  the  errours  of  his  forefathers,  who  brought  in  the 
fuperflitious  worfhipping  of  Idoles. 

Hippolyte  After  his  members  were  drawin 

in  funder  by  fowre  horfes,  Efcidapius  at  Neptiins  re- 
quefl,  glewed  them  together,  and  reviued  him. 

M 

Maufole  tonibe  One  of  the  feauin  miracles  which 

Artemife  caufed  to  be  builded  for  her  hufband  by 
TimotheuSy  Briace^  Scope,  and  fundrie  other  work- 
men. 


THE    TABLE.  77 

Mein  A  riuer  in  Alffia?iie. 

Sein  A  riuer  in  Fraiuice. 

The  Authors  meaning  of  thefe  two  riuers  is,  that  the 
originall  of  the  Almaiiis  came  firfl  out  of  Fraimce, 
contrarie  to  the  vulgar  opinion. 

N 

Ny7iei'oiced  mouth         The  nyne  Mtifes,  whereof  Vranie 
was  one. 


Panchaia  A  towne  in  the  Eaft,  wherein,  it 

is  written,  the  Phxnix  burnis  her  felfe  vpon  Apollos 

altar. 
Pinde  or  Pindiis  A  hill  confecrate  to  Apollo,  and 

the  Mufes. 
Phccmo7ioe  A  woman  who  pronounced  the 

Oracles  of  Apollo. 

S 

Seamans  Jlarres  The  feauen  flarres. 

Semele  Mother  of  Bacchus,  who  being 

deceiued  by  luno,  made  lupiier  come  to  her  in  his 
leafL  thunder,  which  neuerthelefs  confumde  her. 

Syrenes  Taken  heir  for  littill  gray  birdes 

of  Canaria. 

T 

Thais  A  common  harlot  of  Alexandria. 

Trito7i  A  monfler  in  the  fea,  (hapen  like 

a  man. 

Turnus  fifler  Named  luturna,  a  goddefse  of 

the  water,  who  in  the  fhape  of  her  brothers  waggon- 
ner  led  his  chariot  through  the  fields,  ay  till  Ale^o 
appeared  vnto  them  in  the  fhape  of  an  Howlet. 

V 

Vranie  The  heauenly  Mufe. 

FINIS. 


78 


Sonnet  of  the  Authom-. 

^wHE  facound  Greke,  Demojlhenes  by  name, 
) -fc      His  toung  was  ones  into  his  youth  fo  flow, 

As  evin  that  airt,  which  floorifh  made  his  fame. 
He  fcarce  could  name  it  for  a  tyme,  ze  know.        rique." 
So  of  fmall  feidis  the  Lihaii  Cedres  grow : 
So  of  an  Egg  the  Egle  doeth  proceid  : 
From  fountains  fmall  great  Nilus  flood  doeth  flow  : 
Evin  fo  of  rawnis  do  mightie  fiflies  breid. 
Therefore,  good  Reader,  when  as  thow  dois  reid 
Thefe  my  firfl:  fruidis,  difpyfe  them  not  at  all. 
Who  watts,  both  thefe  may  able  be  indeid 
Of  fyner  Poemis  the  begynning  fmall. 

Then,  rather  loaue  my  meaning  and  my  panis, 
Then  lak  my  dull  ingyne  and  blunted  branis. 


FINIS. 


I    H  A V  E    INSERT    FOR 

THE    FILLING    OVT    OF   THIR 

VAC  AND     PAGEIS,     THE    VERIE 

wordis  oi  Pluims  vpon  the 

Fhxnix^ 

as  followis 

*  *  * 


C.     P  L  I  N  I  I 

Nat,  Hijl.  Lib.  Z>edmi,  Cap.  2. 
De  Phoenice. 

If:* 

* 

[jEthiopes  atque  Indi,  difcolores  maximb  et 
inenarrabiles  ferunt  aues,  et  ante  omnes 
nobilem  Arabia  Phoenicem:  haud  fcio  an 
fabulose,  vnum  in  toto  orbe,  nee  vifum 
magnopere.  Aquilae  narratur  magnitudine, 
auri  fulgore  circa  colla,  caetera  purpureus,  cceruleam 
rofeis  caudam  pennis  diflinguentibus,  criflis  faciem, 
capiitque  plumeo  apice  cohoneflante.  Primus  atque 
diligentiffimus  togatorum  de  eo  prodidit  Manilius,  Sen- 
ator ille,  maximis  nobilis  do6lrinis  do(5lore  nullo  : 
neminem  extitiffe  qui  viderit  vefcentem  :  facrum  in 
Arabia  Soli  effe,  viuere  annis  DCLX.  fenefcentem, 
cafia  thurifque  furculis  conRruere  nidum,  replere  odori- 
bus,  et  fuperemori.  Ex  offibus  deinde  et  memedullis 
eius  nafci  prime  ceuvermiculum  :  inde  fieri  pullum ; 
principioque  iufla  funeri  priori  reddere,  et  totum  de- 
ferre  nidum  prope  Panchaiam  in  Solis  vrbem,  et  in  ara 
ibi  deponere.     Cum  huius  alitis  vita  magni  conuer- 


8o 

fionem  ann  fieri  prodit  idem  Maiiilius,  iterumque  fig- 
nificationes  tempeflatum  et  fidemm  eafdem  reuerti. 
Hoc  autem  cira  meridiem  incipere,  quo  die  fignum 
Arietis  Sol  intrauerit.  Et  fuiffe  eius  conuerfionis 
annum  prodente  fe  P.  Licinio,  M.  Cornelio  Conful- 
ibus.  Cornelius  Valerianus  Phoenicem  deuolaffe  in 
AEgyptum  tradit,  Q.  Plautio,  Sex.  Papinio  Coss.  AUa- 
tus  efl  et  in  vrbem  Claudij  Principis  Cenfura,  anno 
vrbis  DCCC,  et  in  comitio  propofitus,  quod  a6lis 
teflatum  efl,  fed  quem  falfum  effe  nemo  dubitaret. 

FINIS. 


I  helped  my  felf  alfo  in  my  Tragedie  thairof,  with 

the  Phoenix  of  la^ajitius  Finniamis,  with 

Gefjieriis  de  Auibiis,  and  dy iters  vthers, 

bot  I  haue  onely  infert  thirfore- 

faid  words  of  Plinius^ 

Becaufe  I  follow 

him  maifl  in 

my   Ira- 

gedie. 
Fareweill, 


On  the  Introduction  and  Early  use  of  Tobacco 
IN  England. 

For  a  difcuflion  as  to  the  knowledge  and  ufe  of  Tobacco  previous 
to  the  Difcovery  of  America  :  fee  The  Athencnim  for  27  June  and 
I  Auguft.  1857. 

I.  1577.  The  earliefl  detailed  account  of  the  herb  Tobacco  in 
the  Englifh  language  I  believe  to  be,  '■'•  Joy  full  newes  oute  of  the 
7iri.ve foiinde  ivorlde  .  .  .  Englifhed  by  John  Frampton 
Marchant."  London.  1577.    A  work  reprinted  in  1580,  1596,  &c. 

In  his  Dedication — dated  London,  i  Ocft.  1577 — to  '  Mafter 
Edwarde  Dier  Efquire, '  Frampton  informs  us  : 

Retourning  right  worshipfull,  home  into  Englande  oute  of  Spaine,  and 
now  not  pressed  with  the  former  toiles  of  my  old  trade,  I  to  passe  the  tyme 
to  some  benefite  of  my  countrie,  and  to  auoyde  idlenesse  :  tooke  in  hande  to 
translate  out  of  Spanishe  into  Englishe,  the  thre  bookes  of  Doctour  Mon- 
ardes  of  Seuill,  the  learned  Phisition,  treatyng  of  the  singuler  and  rare  ver- 
tues  of  certaine  Hearbes,  Trees,  Oyles,  Plantes,  Stones,  and  Drugges  of  the 
Weste  Indies     .... 

Nicholas  Monardes  had  fii-fl  publiflied  his  account  of  To- 
bacco in  the  Second  Part  of  liis  De  las  Cofas  gue  traen  de  Jiei/firas 
hidias  Occidentales  que  finien  en  medicitta.  Publiflied  at  Seville 
in  1 57 1,  and  republiflied  there,  all  three  parts  together,  in  1574. 

The  following  extracfls  are  taken  from  the  fecond  edition  of 
yovfull  Tievz'es,  1580  :  which  Frampton  defcribes  as  "Newly  cor- 
rected as  by  conference  with  the  olde  copies  may  appeare." 
Monardes  tells  us — 

This  Hearbe  which  commonly  is  called  Tabaco,  is  an  Hearbe  of  muche 
antiquitie,  and  knowen  amongst  the  Indians,  and  in  especially  among 
them  of  the  new  Spayne,  and  after  that  those  Countries  were  gotten  by  oui 
Spaniardes,  beyng  taught  of  the  Indians,  they  did  profite  themselues  with 
those  things,  in  the  wounds  which  they  receiued  in  their  Warres,  healing 
themselues  therewith  to  the  great  benefite. 

Within  these  few  yeeres  [Monardes  is  writing  in  T571]  there  hath  beene 
brought  into  Spayne  of  it,  more  to  adornate  Gardens  with  the  fairnesse  thereof, 
and  to  geue  a  pleasant  sight,  than  that  it  was  thought  to  haue  the  maruel- 
lous  medicinable  vertues,  which  it  hath,  but  nowe  wee  doe  vse  it  more  for  his 
vertues.  than  for  his  fairenesse.  For  surely  they  are  such  which  doe  bring 
admiration.     .     .     .    fol.  33. 

The  proper  name  of  it  amongest  the  Indians  is  Picielt,  for  the  name  of  Ta- 
baco is  geuen  to  it  by  our  Spainardes,  by  reason  of  an  Island  that  is  named 
Tabaco.     .     .     .    fol.  34. 

One  of  the  meruelles  of  this  hearbe,  and  that  which  bringeth  most 
admiration,  is,  the  maner  howe  the  Priestes  of  the  Indias  did  vse  it,  which 
was  in  this  manner :  when  there  was  emongest  the  Indians  any  manner  of 
businesse,  of  greate  importaunce,  in  the  which  the  chiefe  Gentlemen  called 
Casiques,or  any  of  the  principall  people  of  the  countrie,  had  necessitie  to 
consult  with  their  Priestes,  in  any  businesse  of  importance ;  they  went 
and  propounded  their  matter  to  their  chiefe  Priest,  forthwith  in  their  pres- 
ence, he  tooke  certayne  leaues  of  the  Tabaco,  and  cast  them  into  the  fire, 
and  did  receiue  the  smoke  of  them  at  his  mouth,  and  at  his  nose  with  a  Cane, 

F 


82     On  the  Introduction  of  Tobacco  into  France. 

and  in  taking  of  it,  hee  fell  downe  vppon  the  ground,  as  a  Dead  man,  and 
remayning  so,  according  to  the  quantitie  of  the  smoke  that  he  had  taken, 
when  the  hearbe  had  done  his  worke,  he  did  reuiue  and  awake,  and 
gaue  them  their  answeres,  according  to  the  visions,  and  illusions  which  hee 
sawe,  whiles  he  was  rapte  in  the  same  manner,  and  he  did  interprete  to  them, 
as  to'him  seemed  best,  or  as  the  Deuill  had  counselled  him,  geuing  them 
continually  doubtfull  answeares,  in  such  sorte,  that  howsoeuer  it  fell  out, 
they  might  say  that  it  was  the  same,  which  was  declared,  and  the  answeare 

that  he  made.  .,11.  1 

In  like  sort  the  rest  of  the  Indians  for  their  pastime,  doe  take  the  smoke 
of  the  Tabaco,  too  make  themselues  drunke  withall,  and  to  see  the  visions, 
and  thinges  that  represent  vnto  them  that  wherein  they  doe  delight :  and 
other  times  thy  take  it  to  knowe  their  businesse,  and  successe,  because  con- 
formable to  that,  whiche  they  haue  scene  beyng  drunke  therewith,  euen  so 
they  iudge  of  their  businesse.  And  as  the  Deuil  is  a  deceauer,  and  hath 
the  knowledge  of  the  vertue  of  hearbes,  so  he  did  shew  the  vertue  of 
this  Hearb,  that  by  the  meanes  thereof,  they  might  see  their  imaginations, 
and  visions,  that  he  hath  represented  to  them,  and  by  that  meanes  deceiue 
them.    fol.  38. 

So  far  Monardes.     The  page  following  his   account  begins 

thus  : — 

Hereafter  followeth  a  further  addition  of  the  Hearbe  called  Tabaco,  other- 
wise called  by  the  Fienchmen  Nicotiane.  Which  hearbe  hath  done  great  cures 
in  the  Realme  of  Fraimce  and  Portztgal,  as  heereafter  at  large  may  appeare 
in  this  treatise  following. 

This  treatife  is  not  found  in  Monardes  :  but  was  taken  by 
Frampton  from  a  celebrated  French  author. 

After  the  death  of  Charles  Estienne,  another  French  do6lor, 
John  Liebaut,  edited  fucceffive  editions  of  his  V Agriculture, 
et  Maifon  Rujiique,  in  1 564,  1565,  1 5 70,  1574,  &c.  :  until  the 
names  of  the  two  medical  men  became  identified  with  this  po- 
pular work. 

In  the  edition  of  1570,  at/.  79,  b.  ii.  c.  76,  will  be  found  the 
French  text  of  '  the  treatife  following,'  which  Frampton  flipped 
into  a  totally  different  author.  Of  this  treatife,  we  ihall  give  the 
effential  portions,  becaufe  it  contains  Nicot's  own  account  of  the 
introduction  of  Tobacco  into  France,  within  the  decade  preceding 
his  relation. 

Liebault  thus  begins  his  difcourfe  : — 

Nicotiane,  although  it  bee  not  long  since  it  hath  beene  knowne  in  France, 
notwithstanding  deserueth  palme  and  price,  and  among  al  other  medicinable 
hearbs,  it  deserueth  to  stand  in  the  first  rank,  by  reason  of  his  singular  ver- 
tues,  and  as  it  were  almost  to  bee  had  in  admiration,  as  hereafter  you  shall 
vnderstand.  And  for  that  none  suche  as  of  auncient  time,  or  of  late  dayes, 
haue  written  the  nature  of  plantes,  did  neuer  make  mention  thereof,  I  haue 
therefore  learned  the  whole  historie  touching  the  same,  which  I  learned  of  a 
gentleman  my  very  friend,  the  first  authour,  inuenter,  and  bringer  of  this 
hearb  into  France  :  wherfore  I  thought  good  to  publish  it  in  writing  for  their 
sakes,  that  haue  so  often  hearde  speaking  of  this  saide  hearbe,  and  yet  neyther 
knew  the  hearbe  nor  the  effectes  thereof. 

This  Hearbe  is  called  Nicotiane,  of  the  name  of  him  that  gaue  the  firste 
inteUigence  thereof  vnto  this  Realme,  as  many  other  plantes  haue  taken  their 
names  of  certayne  Greekes  and  Romaynes,  who  hauing  beene  in  straunge 
Countries,  for  seruice  of  their  common  Weales,  haue  brought  into  their  coun- 
tries many  plants,  which  were  before  vnknowne.     Some  haue  called  this 


On  the  Introduction  of  Tobacco  into  France.     83 

Hcarbe  the  Queenes  Hearbe,  because  it  was  firste  sent  viito  her,  as  heere- 
aftershalbe  declared  by  the  Gentleman,  that  was  the  first  inuenter  of  it,  and 
since  was  by  her  geuen  to  diuers  for  to  sowe,  whereby  it  nught  bee  planted  in 
this  lande.  Others  haue  named  it  the  great  Priors  hearbe,  for  that  he  caused 
it  to  multiply  in  Fraunce,  more  then  any  other,  for  the  greate  reueronce  that 
he  bare  to  [tjhis  hearbe,  for  the  Diuine  etilectes  therin  contayned.  Many  haue 
geuen  it  the  name,  Fettim,  which  is  indeede  the  proper  name  of  the  Hearbe, 
as  they  which  haue  trauellcd  that  Countrie  can  tell.  Notwithstanding,  it  is 
better  to  name  it  Nicoiiane,  by  the  name  of  him  that  sent  it  into  Fraunce 
first,  to  the  ende  that  hee  may  haue  the  honour  thereof,  according  to  his 
desert,  for  that  hee  hath  enriched  our  Countrie  [i.e.  France],  with  so  singalar 
an  Hearbe.  Thus  much  for  the  name,  and  nowe  hearken  fmther  for  the 
whole  Historie. 

Then  follows  Nicot's  own  account  : 

Rlaister  John  Nicot,  Counsellcr  to  the  King,  being  Embassadour  for  his 
Maiestie  in  Portugall,  in  the  yeere  of  o\ir  Lorde.  1559.  60.  61.  went  one  day 
to  see  the  Prysons  of  the  King  of  Portugall :  and  a  Gentleman  beeyng  the 
keeper  of  the  sade  Prisons  presented  him  with  this  hearb,  as  a  strange  Plant 
brought  from  Florida.  The  same  Maister  Nicot,  hauing  caused  the  said 
hearb  to  be  set  in  his  Garden,  where  it  grewe  and  multiplied  maruellously, 
was  vppon  a  time  aduertised,  by  one  of  his  Pages,  that  a  young  man,  of  kinne 
to  that  Page  made  asaye  of  that  hearbe  brused  both  the  hearbe  and  the  I  nice 
together  vppon  an  vlcer,  which  he  had  vpon  his  cheeke  neere  vnto  his  nose, 
comming  of  a  Noli  me  tangcre.  which  began  to  take  roote  already  at  the 
gri>tles  of  the  Nose,  wherewith  hee  founde  himselfe  meruellously  eased. 
Therefore  the  sayde  Maister  Nicot  caused  the  sicke  young  man  to  bee  brought 
before  him,  and  causing  the  saide  hearb  to  be  continued  to  the  sore  eight  or 
ten  daies,  this  saide  Noli  nte  tattgere,  was  vtterly  extinguished  and  healed  : 
and  he  had  sent  it,  while  this  cure  was  a  woorking  to  a  certeine  Phisition  of 
the  King  of  Portugall  one  of  the  greatest  fame  to  examine  the  further  working 
and  effect  of  the  said  Nicotiane,  and  sending  for  the  same  young  man  at  the 
end  of  ten  dayes,  the  sayde  Phisition  seeing  the  visage  of  the  said  sicke  yong 
man,  certified,  that  the  sayde  Noli  me  tangere  was  vtterly  extinguished,  as 
in  deede  he  neuer  felt  it  since. 

Within  a  while  after,  one  of  the  Cookes  of  the  sayde  Embassadour  hauing 
almost  cutte  off  his  thombe,  with  a  great  chopping  knyfe,  the  Steward  of  the 
house  of  the  sayde  Gentleman  ran  to  the  sayde  Nicotiaiie,  and  dressed  him 
therewith  fine  or  sixe  tymes,  and  so  in  the  ende  thereof  he  was  healed  :  from 
that  time  forward  this  hearbe  began  to  bee  famous  throughout  Lis/icbron, 
where  the  court  of  the  kyng  of  Portugall  was  at  that  present,  and  the  vertue 
of  this  sayde  hearbe  was  extolled,  and  the  people  began  to  name  it  the  Am- 
bassadours  hearbe.  Wherefore  there  came  certaine  dayes  after  a  Gentleman 
of  the  Countrie,  Father  to  one  of  the  Pages  of  the  Ambassadour,  who  was 
troubled  with  an  vlcer  in  his  Legge,  hauinge  had  the  same  twoo  yeeres,  and 
demaunded  of  the  sayde  Ambassadour  for  his  hcarbe,  and  vsing  the  same  in 
such  order  as  is  before  written,  at  the  end  of  tenne  or  twelue  daies  hee  was 
healed.  From  that  tyme  forth  the  fame  of  that  same  hearbe  increased  in 
such  sort,  that  many  came  from  al  places  to  haue  some  of  it.  Among  al 
others  there  was  a  woman  that  had  her  face  couered  wyth  a  Ringworme 
rooted,  as  though  she  had  a  Visour  on  her  face,  to  whome  she  saide  L[ord] 
Embassadour  caused  the  hearbe  to  be  giuen,  and  told  how  she  should  vse  it, 
and  at  the  ende  of  eight  or  tenne  daies,  this  woman  was  throughly  healed,  who 
came  and  presented  her  selfe  to  the  Ambassadour,  shewing  him  of  her  healing. 

After  there  came  a  Captaine  to  present  his  Sonne  sick  of  the  kinges  euill  to 
the  sayde  L[ord]  Ambassadour,  for  to  send  him  into  France,  vnto  whome 
there  was  asaye  made  of  the  sayde  hearbe,  which  in  fewe  dayes  did  begin 
to  shewe  great  signcs  of  healing,  and  finally  he  was  altogether  healed  therby 
of  the  kings  euill. 

The  L[ord]  Ambassadour  seeing  so  great  effeclcs  proceeding  of  this  hearbe, 
and  hauing  heard  say  that  the  Lady  Montigue  that  was,  dyed  at  Saint  Ger' 
matis,  of  an  vlcer  bredd  in  her  brest,  that  did  turne  to  a  Noli  me  tangere. 


84  On  the  Introduction  of  Tobacco  into  England. 

for  the  which  there  could  neuer  remedy  bee  founde,  and  lykewyse  that  the 
Countesse  oi  Ricffe,  had  sought  for  al  the  famous  Phisitlons  of  that  Realme, 
for  to  heale  her  face,  vnto  whom  they  could  glue  no  remedy,  he  thought  it 
good  to  communicate  the  same  into  France,  and  did  sende  it  to  king 
Frauncis  the  seconde,  and  to  the  Queene  Mother,  and  to  many  other  Lords 
of  the  Court,  with  the  maner  of  ministring  the  same :  and  howe  to  apply  it 
vnto  the  said  diseases,  euen  as  he  had  found  it  by  experience,  and  chiefly  to 
the  Lorde  of  larunc  gouernour  of  Rogel,  with  whom  the  saide  Lorde  Am- 
bassadour  had  great  amitie  for  the  seruice  of  the  king.  The  which  Lord 
of  larnac  told  one  day  at  the  Queenes  table,  yat  he  had  caused  the  saide 
Nicotiane  to  be  distilled,  and  the  water  to  bee  dronke,  mingled  with  water 
Eicphrasie,  otherwise  called  eyebright,  to  one  that  was  shorte  breathed,  who 
was  therewith  healed.  ... 
[Here/ollozv  descriptions  of  the  herb,  and  directions  for  its  cjdtivation.'] 
Moreouer  the  inhabitantes  of  Florida  do  nourish  themselues  certaine 
tymes,  with  the  smoke  of  this  Hearbe,  which  they  receaue  at  the  mouth 
through  certaine  coffins,  suche  as  the  Grocers  do  vse  to  put  in  their  Spices. 
There  be  other  oyntmentes  prepared  of  the  sayde  hearbe,  with  other  simples, 
but  for  a  truthe  this  only  simple  hearbe,  taken  andapplyedasaforesayde.is  of 
greater  efficacie,  notwithstanding  one  may  make  thereof  an  oyntment,  which 
is  singular,  to  cleanse,  incarnate,  and  knit  together  al  manner  of  woundes  : 
the  making  of  the  sayde  Oyntmente  is  thus.  Take  a  pounde  of  the  freshe 
Leaues  of  the  sayde  Hearbe,  stampe  them,  and  mingle  them  with  newe  Waxe, 
Rosine,  common  oyle,  of  eche  three  ounces,  let  them  boyle  altogether,  vntil 
the  luyce  Nicotiane  be  consumed,  then  adde  therto  three  ounces  of  Venise 
Turpentine,  straine  the  same  through  a  Linen  cloth,  and  keepe  it  in  Pottes 
to  your  vse. 

Liebaut  thus  concludes  : — 

Loe,  here  you  haue  the  true  Historle  of  Nicotiane,  of  the  whiche  the  sayde 
Lorde  Nicot,  one  of  the  Kynges  Counsellers  first  founder  out  of  this  hearbe, 
hath  made  mee  priuie  aswell  by  woorde  as  by  wryting,  to  make  thee  (friendly 
Reader)  partaker  therof,  to  whome  I  require  thee  to  yeeld  as  harty  thankes 
as  I  acknowledge  my  self  bounde  vnto  him,  for  this  benefite  receiued. — Joy- 
full  News,  fol.  42-45. 

In  fo  far  therefore,  as  thefe  two  editions  of  Joy  full  nevves  cir- 
culated, this  much  was  known  in  England  refpeAing  Tobacco, 
fo  early  as  1577-80. 

II.  The  principal  notices  of  the  firfl  introdudlion  of  the  Herb 
into  this  country  are  thefe  : — 

1.  Edmund  Howes,  in  his  continuation  of  J.  Stow's  Annales^ 
[/.  1038.     Ed.  163 1]  dates — 

Tobacco  was  first  brought,  and  made  known  in  England  by  Sir  lohn 
Hawkins,  about  the  yeare  1565  but  not  vsed  by  Englishmen  in  many  yeeres 
after,  though  at  this  day  commonly  vsed  by  most  men,  and  many  women. 

The  dates  of  Mr,  afterwards  Sir  John  Hawkins'  voyages  to  the 
Wefl  Indies,  are 

The  first  Oct.  1562 —      Sept.  1563. 

The  second  18  Oct.  1564 — 20  Sept.  1565. 

'^^tJ^i"'^    1,1  A      ,]•  2  Oct.  1567-25  Jan.  1568. 

the  troublesome  voyadge    )  ^   1       j  j  j 

The  account  of  the  Second  voyage,  by  John  Sparke  the  younger, 

ftates  that  Hawkins,  ranging  along  the  coaft  of  Florida  for  frefh 

water  in  July  1565,  came  upon  the  French  fettlemert  there  under 

Laudoniere :  and  in  defcribing  that  country  Sparke  mentions  that 

the  natives — 


On  the  Introduction  of  Tobacco  into  England.      85 

The  Fhridians  when  they  trauell  haue  a  kinde  of  herbe  drj'ed,  which 
with  a  cane,  and  an  earthen  cup  in  the  end,  with  fire  and  the  dried  herbs 
put  together,  do  sucke  thorow  the  cane  the  smiike  thereof,  which  smoke 
satibfieth  their  hunger,  and  therewith  they  Hue  foure  or  fine  dayes  without 
meat  or  drinke,  and  this  all  the  Frenchmen  vsed  for  this  purpose :  yet  do  they 
holde  opinion  withall,  that  it  causeth  water  and  fleame  to  void  from  their  sto- 
macks. — Hakluyt,  p.  541.     Ed.  1589. 

2.  Howes,  on  the  fame  pa[:[e  as  the  preceding,  flates — 

Apricocks,  Mellycatofis,  Miisk-Milliotn,  and  Tobacco,  came  into  England 
about  the  20  yeare  of  Queene  Elizabeth  [1577]. 

And  adds  in  the  margin — 

Sir  Walter  Raleigh  was  the  first  that  brought  Tobacco  into  vse,  when  all 
men  wondred  what  it  meant. 

The  date  here  given,  fo  far  as  Tobacco  fmoking  generally  is 
concerned,  muft  be  wrong  by  about  ten  years. 


III.  Smoking  appears  to  have  been  firfl  taught  in  England, 
under  the  following  circumftances  : — 

1.  Sir  \Valter  Raleigh's  firfl  Expedition  took  pofTeffion  of  Vir- 
ginia on  13  July  15S4,  and  after  a  fix  weeks'  flay  in  the  country, 
returned  home.  The  next  year,  a  fecond  expedition  conveyed 
out  a  colony  under  Mafler  Ralph  Lane,  which  remained  in  the 
country  from  17  Aug.  15S5  to  18  June  1586:  when  vSir  Francis 
Drake  and  his  fleet  returning  from  his  victorious  raid  in  the  Wefl 
Indies  brought  home  the  colony  to  the  number  of  103  perfons. 
Among  thefe  was  the  celebrated  mathematician  Thomas  Hariot, 
who  in  his  exceffively  rare  '  Briefe  and  true  report  of  the  nno  found 

land  of  Virginia  :  6:'c Imprinted  at  London  1588,' thus 

defcribes  Tobacco,  and  the  adoption  of  the  fmoking  of  it  by  thefe 
Virginian  colonifls. 

There  is  an  herbe  which  is  sowed  a  part  by  it  selfe  and  is  called  by  the 
inhabitants  Tppdivoc:  In  the  West  Indies  it  hath  diuers  names,  according  to 
the  seuerall  places  and  countries  where  it  groweth  and  is  vsed  :  The  Spani- 
ardes  generally  call  it  Tobacco.  The  leaues  thereof  being  dried  and  brought 
into  powder :  they  vse  to  take  the  fume  or  smoke  thereof  by  sucking  it  through 
pipes  made  of  claie  into  their  stomacke  and  heade  ;  from  whence  it  purgeth 
superfluous  fleame  and  other  grosse  humors,  openeth  all  the  poies  and  pass- 
ages of  the  body  :  by  which  meanes  the  vse  thereof,  not  only  preserueth  the 
body  from  obstructions ;  but  also  if  any  be,  so  that  they  haue  not  beene  of 
too  long  continuance,  in  short  time  breaketh  them :  wherby  their  bodies 
are  notably  preserued  in  health,  and  know  not  many  greeuous  diseases 
wherewithall  wee  in  England  are  oftentimes  afflicted. 

This  Vpp&ivoc  is  of  so  precious  estimation  amongest  them,  that  they  thinke 
their  gods  are  maruelously  delighted  therwith  :  Whereupon  sometime  they 
make  hallowed  fires  and  cast  some  of  the  pouder  therein  for  a  sacrifice:  being 
in  a  storme  vppon  the  waters,  to  pacifie  their  gods,  they  cast  some  vp  into 
the  aire  and  into  the  water :  so  a  weare  for  fish  being  newly  set  vp,  they  cast 
some  therein  and  into  the  aire:  also  after  an  escape  of  danger,  they  cast  some 
into  the  aire  likewise:  but  all  done  with  strange  gestures,  stamping,  some- 
time dauncing,  clapping  of  hands,  holding  vp  of  hands,  and  staring  vp  into 
the  heauens,  vttering  therewithal  and  chattering  strange  words  and  noises. 

We  our  selues  dunng  the  time  we  were  there  vsed  to  suck  it  after  their 
maner,  as  also  since  our  returne,  and  haue  found  manie  rare  and  wonderful 
experiments  of  the  vertues  thereof;  of  which  the  relation  would  require  a 


86    On  the  Introduction  of  Tobacco  into  England. 

volume  by  it  selfe  :  the  vse  of  it  by  so  manie  of  late,  men  and  women  of  great 
calling  as  else,  and  some  learned  Phisitions  also,  is  sufficient  witnes. 

It  would  therefore  appear  that  Raleigh  himfelf  had  nothing  to 
do  either  with  the  introdudlion  of  the  weed  itfelf,  or  of  the  habit  of 
fmoking  of  it.  Hawkins  may  have  brought  home  a  few  fpecimens 
of  the  plant  in  1565  ;  but  for  the  importation  of  it  in  any  quantity 
and  for  the  teaching  of  how  to  fmoke  it,  we  are  indebted  to  Mafler 
Ralph  Lane  and  to  his  fellow-colonifts,  who  acquired  both  from 
the  Indians,  during  the  twelve  months  they  were  cut  off  from  all 
intercourfe  with  their  mother-country. 

2.  William  Camden,  who  was  fecond,  afterwards  Head  Mafter 
of  Wefhminfler  School  between  1575-1593,  and  confequently  a 
contemporary  witnefs,  in  his  Annales,  publifhed  in  Latin  in  1615, 
at  p.  388,  gives  this  account ;  of  which  this  is  the  earliefl  tranfla- 
tion  into  Englifh. 

These  were  the  first  (that  I  know  of)  that  brought  at  their  returne  into 
England ,  that  Indian  Plant  called  Tobacco,  or  Nicotiana,  which  they  vsed, 
being  instructed  by  the  Indians,  against  crudities  of  the  Stomack.  And 
certes  since  that  time  it  is  grown  so  frequent  in  vse,  and  of  such  price,  that 
many,  nay,  the  most  part,  with  an  insatiable  desire  doe  take  of  it,  drawing 
into  their  mouth  the  smoke  thereof,  which  is  a  strong  sent,  through  a  Pipe 
made  of  earth,  and  venting  of  it  againe  through  their  nose  ;  some  for  wanton- 
nesse,  or  rather  fashion  sake,  and  other  for  healths  sake,  insomuch  that  To- 
bacco shops  are  set  vp  in  greater  number  than  either  Alehouses  or  Tauernes. 
And  as  one  said,  but  falsely,  the  bodies  of  such  Englishmen,  as  are  so  much 
delighted  with  this  plant,  did  seeme  to  degenerate  into  the  nature  of  the 
Sauages,  because  they  were  caried  away  with  the  selfe-same  thing,  beleeuing 
to  obtaine  and  conserue  their  health  by  the  selfe-same  meanes,  as  the  barbari- 
ans did. — Bk.  III.  p.  107.     Ed.  1625. 

In  the  face  of  thefe  fa61;s,  attefted  by  early  contemporary  tefti- 
mony :  all  accounts  which  reprefent  Sir  W.  Raleigh  as  introduc- 
ing Tobacco  into  England  mufl  be  confidered  falfe  in  that  refpe(f^. 

Incidentally  this  agrees  with  the  account — though  in  itfelf  no 
evidence — given  in  an  undated  4  pp.  tra6l,  The  Veninious  Qua- 
lities of  Tobacco,  apparently  printed  before  1650. 

Tabacco  is  an  ignite  Plant,  called  by  the  native  Americans  Picielt;  by 
those  of  Hispaniola,  Pete  be  Cenuc;  as  by  those  of  Ne%u  Fra7ice,  Peti, 
Petum,  and  Petunum.  It  was  called  by  the  French  Nicotiana,  from  yokn 
Nicotitis  Embassador  to  the  king  of  Fraftce,  who  An.  1559,  first  sent  this 
Plant  into  France.  But  now  it  is  generally  by  us  Europeans  termed  Tabaco, 
(which  we  improperly  pronounce  Tobacco)  a  name  first  given  it  by  the  Spani- 
ards from  their  Hand  Tabaco,  which  abounded  with  this  Plant;  whereof  had 
Plato  had  as  much  experience  as  we,  he  would,  without  al  peradventure, 
have  philosophised  thereon.  They  say  we  are  beholding  to  Sir  Frajicis  Drake's 
Mariners  for  the  knowledge  and  use  of  the  Plant,  who  brought  its  Seed  from 
Virginie  into  England  3.hout  the  year  1585. 

IV.  But  while  Sir  Walter  introduced  neither  the  Herb  nor  the 
manner  of  fmoking  it,  there  is  a  general  confent  that  he  princi- 
pally bi-otight  the  habit  of  Tobacco-fmoking,  or,  as  it  was  at  firfl 
called,  Tohacco-c^rin/ang-,  into  fafhion.  His  name,  and  his  al- 
mofl  exclufively,  became  identified  with  the  new  National  Habit. 

Yet  even  of  this,  we  have  but  little  demonftrative  proof. 


On  the  Introduction  of  Tobacco  into  England.     87 

It  may,  however,  be  well  to  give  fome  of  the  principal  traditions 
and  legends  on  this  point. 

1.  John  Aubrey,  F.R.S.,  in  his  Minutes  of  Z/z/ifj-^^/w///^/// 
Mat,  of  wliich  his  Introducloiy  letter  to  Anthony  a  Wood  is 
dated  15  June  16S0,  gives  the  following  in  his  life  of  Raleigh. 

He  was  the  first  that  brought  tobacco  into  England,  and  into  fashion.  In 
our  part  of  North  Wilts — e.g.  Malmesbury  hundred — it  came  first  into 
fashion  by  Sir  Walter  Long.  They  had  first  silver  pipes.  The  ordinary  sort 
made  use  of  a  walnut  shell  and  a  strawe.  I  have  heard  my  grandfather  I^yte 
say,  that  one  pipe  was  handed  from  man  to  man  round  the  table.  Sir  W. 
Raleigh  standmg  in  a  stand  at  Sir  Robert  Poyntz  parke,  at  Acton,  tooke  a 
pipe  of  tobacco,  which  made  the  ladies  quitt  it  till  he  had  donne.  Within 
these  35  years,  'twas  scandalous  for  a  divine  to  take  tobacco.  It  was  sold 
then  for  its  wayte  in  siluer.  I  haue  heard  some  of  our  old  yeomen  neiglibours 
say,  that  when  they  went  to  Malmesbury  or  Chippenham  Market,  they 
culled  out  their  biggest  shillings  to  lay  in  the  scales  against  the  tobacco ; 
now,  the  customes  of  it  are  the  greatest  his  majestic  hath. — Letters  written 
by  Eminent  Persons.     Ed.  by  J  ohn  Aubrey,     ii.  512.     Ed.  1813. 

2.  J.  P.  Malcolm,  in  his  Londiniiim  Rediviviim,  iv.  /.  490, 
Ed.  iSoi,  fl:;tes. 

'  There  was  a  tradition,  in  the  parish  of  St.  Mattliew,  Friday  Street,  that 
Sir  Walter  Raleigh  and  bir  Hugh  Myddleton  often  smoaked  tobacco  together 
at  the  door  of  Sir  Hugb'i  house '  in  that  parish. 

3.  Thomas  Pennant,  in  his  Journey  to  Snowdon.,  p.  28,  Ed. 
1781,  which  forms  the  fecond  volume  of  his  Tour  in  Wales,  the 
firfl  of  Avhich  was  publifhed  in  1778  ;  gives  the  following  account 
of  William  Middleton  :  the  third  fon  of  Richard  Middleton, 
Governor  of  Denbigh  Caflle,  and  brother  to  Sir  Hugh  Middle- 
ton,  the  fixth  fon  in  that  family. 

The  particular  information,  from  '  It  is  fayd'  to  +,  is  given  on 
the  authority  of  the  Sebright  A/SS.,  i.e.  MSS.  formerly  belong- 
ing to  Mr.  Edward  Lloyd,  but  lent  to  Pennant  by  Sir  John  Se- 
bright, Bart.,  in  whofe  poffeflion  they  were,  at  the  date  of  his 
preface,  i  March  1781.  The  lafl  part  of  the  paragraph  is  merely 
Pennant's  fpeculation :  but  there  may  be  fome  truth  in  the  MS. 
legend. 

The  third,  William,  was  a  sea  captain,  and  an  eminent  poet.  His  early 
education  was  at  Oxford :  but  his  military  turn  led  him  abroad,  where  he 
signalized  himself  as  soldier  and  sailor.  He  translated  the  psalms  into 
IVelsh  metre,  and  finished  them  on  y(i?i.  4th,  1595,  aptid  Scutum  insulam 
occidentalium  Ifidorum  ;  which,  as  well  as  his  Barddoniaeth,  or  art  of 
Welsh,  poetry,  were  published  in  London;  the  first  in  1603,  the  other  in 
1593.  It  is  sayed,  that  he,  with  captain  Thomas  Price,  of  Plasyollin,  and 
one  captain  Koet,  \vere  the  first  who  smoked,  or  (as  they  called  it)  drank 
tobacco  publickly  in  London;  and  that  the  Londoners  flocked  from  all  parts 
to  see  them.t  Pipes  were  not  then  invented,  so  they  used  the  twisted  leaves, 
or  segars.  The  invention  is  usually  ascribed  to  Sir  Walter  Raleigh.  It 
may  be  so ;  but  he  was  too  good  a  courtier  to  smoke  in  public,  especially  in 
the  reign  of  fames,  who  even  condescended  to  write  a  book  against  the 
practice,  under  the  title  of  The  Counter-blast  to  Tobacco,    pp.  28,  29. 

4.  A  Phyfician  [Dr.  J.  A.  Paris]  in  A  Guide  to  Mounts  Bay 
and  La7ids  Endy  p.  39,  Ed.  1824,  flates. 


88     On  the  Introduction  of  Tobacco  into  England. 

A  tradition  exists  heie,  that   Tobacco  was  first  smoked  by  Sir  Walter 
Raleigh  in  Penzance,  on  his  landing  from  America. 
Which  legend  is  quite  contrary  to  the  fadls. 

5.  William  Oldys,  in  his  Life  of  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  prefixed 
to  The  Hijlory  of  the  Woj'ld,  Ed.  1736,  xxxii.,  gives  the  follow- 
ing from  a  4to  MS.  entitled  Apophthegms  of  the  Englifh  Nation^ 
then  in  the  colle6lion  of  Rodney  Fane,  Esq. 

He  [Sir  W.  Raleigh]  assured  her  majesty  [Queen  Elizabeth]  he  had  so 
well  experienced  the  nature  of  it,  that  he  could  tell  her  of  what  weight 
even  the  smoke  would  be  in  any  quantity  propos'd  to  be  consum'd.  Her 
majesty  fixing  her  thoughts  upon  the  most  Impracticable  part  of  the  experi- 
ment, that  of  bounding  the  smoke  In  2,ballance,  suspected  that  he  put  the  tra- 
veller upon  her,  and  would  needs  lay  him  a  wager  he  could  not  solve  the  doubt : 
so  he  procured  a  quantity  agreed  upon  to  be  thoroughly  smok'd,  then  went  to 
weighing ;  but  it  was  of  the  ashes  ;  and  in  the  conclusion,  what  was  wanting 
in  the  prime  weight  of  the  tobacco,  her  majesty  did  not  deny  to  have  been 
evaporated  In  smoke  ;  and  further  said,  that  many  labourers  in  the  fire  site 
had  heard  of  who  turned  their  gold  into  smoke,  but  Ralegh  luas  the  first 
who  had  turned  smoke  into  gold. 

James  Howell,  Familiar  Letters^  Hi.  12,  Ed.  1650,  in  a  Letter 
on  Tobacco,  incidentally  confirms  this  ftory. 

But  If  one  would  try  a  pretty  conclusion  how  much  smoak  ther  Is  In  a 
pound  of  Tobacco,  the  ashes  will  tell  him  ;  for  let  a  pound  be  exactly 
weighed,  and  the  ashes  kept  charily  and  weighed  afterwards,  what  wants  of 
a  pound  weight  In  the  ashes  cannot  be  denied  to  have  bin  smoak,  which 
evaporated  Into  air;  I  haue  bin  told  that  Sir  Walter  Rawleigh  won  a  wager 
of  Queen  Elizabeth  upon  this  niclty. 

6.  We  have  now  come  to  a  legend,  perhaps  the  moft  untrufl- 
worthy  of  all. 

(i.)  In  Tarlton^s  Jc/ls,  1611,  4to,  there  occurs  the  following 
ftory. 

How  Tarlton  tooke  tobacco  at  the  first  comming  up  of  it. 
Tarlton,  as  other  gentlemen  used,  at  the  first  comming  up  of  tobacco,  did 
take  It  more  for  fashion's  sake  than  otherwise ;  and  being  in  a  roome,  set 
between  two  men  overcome  with  wine,  and  they  never  seeing  the  like, 
wondred  at  it,  and  seeing  the  vapour  come  out  of  Tarlton's  nose,  cryed  out: 
fire,  fire  !  and  threw  a  cup  of  wine  in  Tarlton's  face.  Make  no  more  stirre, 
quoth  Tarlton,  the  fire  Is  quenched ;  if  the  sheriffes  come,  it  will  turne  to  a 
fine,  as  the  custome  is.  And  drinking  that  againe :  fie,  sayes  the  other,  what 
a  stinke  It  makes ;  I  am  almost  poysoned.  If  it  offend,  sales  Tarlton,  let's 
every  one  take  a  little  of  the  smell,  and  so  the  savour  will  quickly  goe  :  but 
tobacco  whiffes  made  them  leave  him  to  pay  2\\.—  Shakespeare's  jest-Books, 
Ed.  by  W.  C.  Hazlitt.     ii.  221.     Ed.  1864. 

(2.)  In  1619,  Barnaby  Rich  inferted  in  the /^r^«^  edition  of 
The  Irifh  Hubbitb,  or  the  Englifh  Hue  and  Crie,  a  similar  ftory. 

I  remember  a  pretty  lest  of  Tobacco.  That  was  this.  A  certaine  Welch- 
man  comming  newly  to  London,  and  beholding  one  to  take  tobacco,  neuer 
seeing  the  like  before,  and  not  knowing  the  manner  of  it,  but  perceluing  him 
vent  smoake  so  fast,  and  supposing  his  inward  parts  to  be  on  fire  :  cried  out, 
O  Ihesu,  Ihesu  man,  for  the  passion  of  Cod  hold,  for  by  Cods  splud  ty 
snowts  on  fire,  and  hauing  a  bowle  of  beere  In  his  hand,  threw  it  at  the 
others  face  to  quench  his  smoking  nose. — p.  45. 

(3.)  To  fomewhat  fimilar  purport  is  the  legend  of  Sir  W.  Raleigh 
and  the  Tankard  of  Ale.  Of  this  ftory,  though  evidently  current 
in  the  feventeenth  century,  Oldys  could  quote  no  earlier  authority 
Ihan  The  BfitifJi  Apollo,  3d  Ed. />.   376,   London   1726:  and  we 


On  the  Introduction  of  ToiiAcco  into  Em-.i-and.      89 

can  only  adduce  the  authority  of  the  tirft.  edition  of  the  fame 
work. 

The  BntiJJi  Apollo  was  a  bi-weekly  periodical  '  Perform'd  by 
a  Society  of  Gentlemen,'  partly  devoted  to  the  explanation  of 
difficulties  in  Divinity,  JMathematics,  Love,  and  fuch  like,  and 
partly  to  Poetry  and  Political  News.  In  itfclf  of  no  authority 
whatever,  it  merely  difpenfed  its  modicums  of  current  knowledi^e 
from  the  learned  to  the  general  public. 

In  Vol.  I,  No.  43,  publifhed  on  July  7,  1708,  occur  the  fol- 
lowing queflion  and  anfwer. 

Q.  Gentlemen,  Pray  how  long  is  it  since,  the  stnoaking  Tobacco,  and  tite 
taking  Snuff  luith  been  in  Use  here  in  England;  the  time  ivheti  they  ivere 
Jirst  brought  over,  and  hoiv,  or  by  whom.     Your  Humble  Servant,     H.  S. 

A.  Snufl",  tho'  the  Use  of  it  has  been  long  known  to  such,  as  were  by  Mer- 
chandizing or  other  means,  familiar  with  the  Spanish  Customes,  has  been 
till  lately,  a  perfect  Stranger  to  the  Practice  of  the  British  Nation,  and  like 
our  other  Fashions  came  to  us  from  I'rance,  but  the  Use  of  Tobacco-sinoak- 
iiig,  was  introduc'd  by  Sir  IValter  Rmvleigh,  in  the  Reign  of  Queen  Eliza- 
beth ;  and  since  a  comical  story  depends  upon  the  Relation,  it  may  not  be 
unacceptable  to  the  Querist  and  the  Publick. 

Sir  Walter  having  imitated  the  Indians  by  delighting  in  their  Favorite 
Weed,  was  unwilling  to  disuse  it,  and  therefore  at  his  return  to  Englatid, 
supplied  himself  with  some  Hogsheads,  which  he  plac'd  in  his  own  Study, 
and  generally  indulg'd  himself  in  Smoaking  secretly,  two  Pipes  a  Daj' :  at 
which  times  he  order'd  a  Simple  Fellow,  who  waited  at  his  Study  Door,  to 
bring  him  up  a  Tankard  of  old  Ale  and  Nutmeg,  always  laying  aside  the 
Pipe,  when  he  heard  his  Servant  coming  ;  But  while  he  was  one  day, 
earnestly  imploy'd  in  Reading  something,  which  amus'd  him,  The  Fellow 
enter'd,  and  surprizing  his  Master,  as  the  Smoak  ascended  thickly  from  his 
Mouth  and  the  Bole  of  the  Pipe,  he  threw  the  Ale  directly  in  his  Face;  and 
running  down  Stairs  alarm'd  the  Family  with  repeated  Exclamations,  that 
his  Master  was  on  fire  in  the  in-side,  and  before  they  could  get  up  Stairs 
would  be  burnt  to  Ashes. 

How  much  this  legend  wanders  from  the  facfls  of  the  cafe,  will 
be  apparent  from  the  above.  There  may,  however,  be  earlier 
accounts  of  this  flory  in  a  more  credible  form  :  but  we  have  not 
met  with  them.  The  flory  may  poffibly  have  been  connecfted 
with  other  names  befides  Tarleton,  the  Welflnnan,  and  Raleigh. 
Oldys,  in  quoting  the  legend,  remarks. 

This  I  say,  if  true,  has  nothing  in  it  of  more  surprising  or  unparallel'd 
simplicity,  than  there  was  in  that  poor  Norwegian,  who  upon  the  first  sight 
of  Roses  could  not  be  induced  to  touch,  tho'  he  saw  them  grow,  being  so 
amazed  to  behold  trees  budding  with  ffre :  or,  to  come  closer  by  way  of 
retaliation,  than  there  was  in  those  Virginians  themselves,  who,  the  first 
time  they  seized  upon  a  quantity  of  Gun-powder  which  belong'd  to  the  Etiglisk 
colony,  sow'd  it /or  grain,  or  the  seed  of  some  strange  vegetable  in  the  earth, 
with  full  expectation  of  reaping  a  plentiful  crop  of  combustion  by  the  next 
harvest  to  scatter  their  enemies.     Li/e  of  Sir  W.  Raleigh,  xxxi.    .£■</.  1736. 

6.  We  may  conclude  this  firing  of  flories,  with  a  truflworthy 
account  of  Sir  W.  Raleigh's  Tobacco  Box.  Oldys  in  his  Life^ 
xxxi.  Note  e,  Ed.  1736,  tells  us,  that 

Being  at  Leeds  in  Yorkshire,  soon  after  Mr.  Ralph  Thoresby  the  anti- 
quary died.  Anno  1725.  I  saw  his  Mttsceutn ;  and  in  it,  among  other  rarities, 
what  himself  has  publickly  call'd  (in  the  catalogue  thereof,  annexed  to  his 
antiquities  of  that  town)  Sir  IValter  Ralegh's  tobacco  box.  From  the  best 
of  my  memory,   I  can  resemble  its  outward  appearance  to  nothing  more 


90    On  the  Introduction  of  Tobacco  into  England. 

nearly  than  one  of  our  modern  Muff-cases ;  about  the  same  height  and  width, 
cover'd  with  red  leather,  and  open'd  at  top  (but  with  a  hinge,  I  think)  like 
one  of  those.  In  the  inside,  there  was  a  cavity  for  a  receiver  of  glass  or 
metal,  which  might  hold  half  a  pound  or  a  pound  of  tobacco ;  and  from  the 
edge  of  the  receiver  at  top,  to  the  edge  of  the  box,  a  circular  stay  or  collar, 
with  holes  in  it,  to  plant  the  tobacco  about,  with  six  or  eight  pipes  to  smoke 
it  in.  This  travelling  box,  with  the  MSS.  Medals  and  other  rarities  in  its 
company,  descending  to  a  young  clergyman,  the  son  of  the  deceased,  was 
soon  after  reported  to  have  been  translated  to  Lofuion. 

V.  The  general  credence  and  affociation  of  Smoking  with 
Sir  W.  Raleigh  being  remembered  ;  may  it  not  be  taken  as  proof 
of  a  malignancy  towards  him — even  thus  early — on  the  part  of 
the  Writer  of  the  Coimta-blajle  ;  in  that  he  depreciates  '  the  firfl 
Author'  as  neither  King,  great  Conqueror,  nor  learned  Dodlor 
of  Phyficke,'  and  affirms  the  cuflome  to  be  'brought  in  by  a 
father  fo  generally  hated ;'  in  that  he  wilfully  or  ignorantly  falfi- 
fies  the  hiftory  of  the  Introduclion  of  Tobacco;  concodling  a  de- 
gradmg  flory  for  his  purpofe. 

VI.  We  have  now  but  to  notice  the  early  beginnings  of  the 
Tobacco  Controverfy,  which — fometimes  flumbering,  fometimes 
raging — has  lafted  to  our  own  time,  and  will  yet  go  on.  It 
created  a  larger  early  Tobacco  literature  in  England  than  is  gene- 
rally thought,  or  than  we  have  been  able  to  trace.  It  raged  over 
Europe  as  well  as  in  England. 

And  here  we  may  exprefs  fome  aflonifhment  that  no  one  among 
the  countlefs  myriads  of  Smokers,  has  ever  written  a  Hiftory  of 
the  Tobacco  Literature  and  of  the  progrefs  of  Smoking  through 
civilized  and  uncivilized  communities,  even  unto  this  laft  age, 
wherein  the  Whahabees  of  Arabia  punifh  it,  under  the  name  of 
Drinking  the  JJiameful  with  death.  Of  Iketches  there  are  feveral . 
Mr.  F.  Tiedeman  has  given  an  excellent  one  of  the  general  Intro- 
du6lion  of  the  plant  into  Europe,  in  his  Gefchichte  des  Tabaks,  etc. , 
Frankfort,  1854.  Mr.  F.  W.  Fairholt  in  his  Tobaocco:  its  hi/- 
iory  and  ajjociations,  London,  1859,  has  given  a  good  inflalment 
towards  a  Hiftory  of  the  fubjedl:  while  A  Paper:  of  Tobacco,  by 
Jofeph  Fume  [W.  A.  Chatto]  London,  1839,  is  a  flighter  fludyflill. 
Another  work,  A  Pinch  of  Snuff,  London,  1839,  I  have  been 
unable  to  meet  with.  Dr.  H.  W.  Cleland  in  his  privately  printed 
work  Ofi  the  Hijlory  and  Properties,  Chemical  and  Medical,  of 
Tobacco,  Glasgow,  July  1840 — which  work  also  we  have  not  had 
the  advantage  of  confulting — gives  a  lift  of  150  works  on  this 
fubjedl.  All  thefe  modern  works  are  but  helps  to  the  future  Hif- 
torian  of  Tobacco. 

VII.  To  thefe  ;  we  can  add  here  but  another  fketch  of  the 
earlier  Controverfy  ;  and  that  a  very  limited  one.  It  will  be  con- 
venient to  give  the  notices  under  each  year  :  dwelling  more  par- 
ticularly on  thofe  which  incidentally  illuflrate  the  growth  of  the 
Habit,  as  well  as  the  progrefs  of  the  Controverfy. 


On  the  Early  Use  of  Tobacco  in  England.         91 

1587.  De Herba Panacea,  written  by  Giles  Evarard,  latinized 

i^GlDiUsEvERARDUS,  may bejufl mentioned:  asit  formed  the  text 

of  a  larger  Englifh  work,  Panacea :  published  in  London  in  1659. 

1590.  E.  Spenser,  in  Faery  Qiieene,  very  early  refers  to  Tobacco. 

There,  whether  yt  diuine  Tobacco  were, 

Or  Pannctuea,  or  Polygeny 

She  fownd.         Bk.  Hi.  Cant  v.  Stanza  32,/.  471.  Ed.  1590. 

1595.  WiLLL\M  Barley  had  a  licence  to  print  a  Treatife  de- 
scribing the  nature  of  Tobacco.     Herbert's  Ames,  ii.  277. 

1596.  Ben  Jonson,  in  Every  Man  in  his  Hntnour,  Act  in. 
Sc.  2,  acted  on  25th  November  1596,  thus  very  skilfully  represents 
both  sides  of  the  controversy,  in  the  speeches  of  Bobadilla  and  Cob. 

Bobadilla.  Body  of  nie  :  hero's  the  remainder  of  seuen  pound,  since  yes- 
terday was  seuennight.  It's  your  right  Trinidado  :  did  you  neuer  take  any, 
signior  ?  '  [it  so. 

Stephano.  No  truly  sir  ?  but  i'le  leame  to  take  it  now,  since  you  commend 

Bobadilla.  Signior  beleeue  me,  (.vpon  my  relation^  for  what  I  tel  you,  the 
world  shall  not  iniproue.  I  haue  been  in  the  Indies  ^where  this  herbe  growes) 
where  neither  my  selfe,  nor  a  dozen  Gentlemen  more  (of  my  knowledge)  haue 
receiued  the  taste  of  any  other  nutriment,  in  the  world,  for  the  space  of  one 
and  twentie  weekes,  but  Tabacco  onely.  Therefore  it  cannot  be  but  'tis 
most  diuine.  Further,  take  it  in  the  nature,  in  the  true  kinde  so,  it  makes  an 
Antidote,  that  (,had  you  taken  the  most  deadly  poysonous  simple  in  all  Flor- 
ence, it  should  expell  it,  and  clarifie  you,  with  as  much  ease,  as  I  speak. 

And  for  your  greene  wound,  your  Balsajninn,  and  your are  all  meere 

gulleries,  and  trash  to  it,  especially  your  Trinidado ;  your  Newcotiati  is 
good  too  :  I  could  say  what  I  know  of  the  vertue  of  it,  for  the  exposing  of 
rewmes,  raw  humors,  crudities,  obstructions,  with  a  thousand  of  this  kind  ; 
but  I  professe  my  selfe  no  quacke-saluer  :  only  thus  much  :  by  Hercules  I 
doe  holde  it,  and  will  affirme  it  (before  any  Prince  in  Europe)  to  be  the  most 
foueraigne,  and  pretious  herbe,  that  euer  the  earth  tendred  to  the  vse  of  man. 
Immediately  afterwards  ;  he  makes  Cob  reprefent  the  other  side. 

Cob.  By  gods  deynes  :  I  marie  what  pleasure  or  felicitie  they  haue  in 
taking  this  rogish  Tabacco  :  it's  good  for  nothing  but  to  choake  a  man,  and 
till  him  full  of  smoake,  and  imbers :  there  were  foure  died  out  of  one  house 
last  weeke  with  taking  of  it,  and  two  more  the  bell  went  for  yester-night, 
one  of  them  they  say  will  ne're  scape  it,  he  voyded  a  bushell  of  soote  yes- 
ter-day,  vpward  and  downeward  By  the  stockes  ;  and  there  were  no  wiser 
men  then  I,  I'ld  haue  it  present  death,  man  or  woman,  that  should  but  deale 
with  a  Tabacco  pipe  ;  why,  it  will  stifle  them  all  in  the'nd  as  many  as  vse 
it ;  it's  little  better  than  rats  bane.     Ed.  1601. 

(3, )  Tobacco  is  faid  not  to  be  alluded  to  by  Shakefpeare  or  in 
the  Arabian  Nights. 

(4. )  It  is  often  noticed  by  other  Englifh  dramatifls  :  as  Dekker 
and  others  later  on.   See  Malone,  Iliji.  Ace.  ofJitigliJJi  Stage,  p.  584. 

1597.  Thomas  Gerard,  'Master in  Chiurvrgerie,'  figures  and 
dcfcribes  the  Tobacco  plant  in  T/ie  Herbal  or  General  Histoire  oj 
Tlantes,  Bk.  ii.  pp.  285-9. 

1597.  Bp.  Joseph  Hall  publiflies  his  Satires,  in  which  he  al- 
ludes to  Tobacco  Smoking,  Bk.  iv.  Sat.  4  ;  Bk,  v.  Sat.  2. 

1598.  Paul  Hentzner,  in  his  Latin  Itinerariuni  under 
Augufl  1598,  has  a  paffage,  of  which  the  following  is  a  tranfla- 
tion  by  Mr.  W.  B.  Rye  : — 

At  these  spectacles,  and  everywhere  else,  the  English  are  constantly  smok- 
ing the  Nicotian  weed,  which  in  America  is  called  Tohaca — others  call  it 
Ftetum — [/.^.  J'etun,  the  Brazilian  name  for  Tobacco,  from  which  the  allied 


92         On  the  Early  Use  of  Tobacco  in  England. 

beautiful  plant  'Petunia'  derives  its  appellation,]  and  generally  in  this 
manner :  they  have  pipes  on  purpose  made  of  clay,  into  the  farther  end  of 
which  they  put  the  herb,  so  dry  that  it  may  be  rubbed  into  powder,  and 
lighting  it,  they  draw  the  smoke  into  their  mouths,  which  they  puff  out  again 
through  their  nostrils  like  funnels,  along  with  it  plenty  of  phlegm  and  de- 
fluxion  from  the  head. — England  as  seen  by  Foreigners,  p.  216,  ed.  1865. 

1599.  Henry  Buttes,  M.A.  and  Fellow  of  C.C.C,  in  C[am- 
bridge],  wrote  a  strange  work,  Diets  Dry  Diujier,  of  which  title 
he  gives  this  explanation — 

Dyets  dry  Dinner.  That  is,  varietie  of  Fare  ;  prouided,  prepared  and  or- 
dered, at  Dyets  own  prescription  :  whose  seruant  and  Attendant  at  this  feast 
1  professe  my  selfe.  Thus  far  (perhaps)  not  disliked  of  any.  A  Dry  Dinner, 
not  only  Caftintint  Pranditim,  without  Wine,  but  Accipitrinian,  without  all 
drinke  except  Tabacco,  (which  also  is  but  Dry  Driiike) :  herein  not  like  to 
be  liked  of  many.  What  ere  it  be  (as  he  saith  in  the  Comedle)  Habeas  vt 
Nacta,  take  it  as  you  finde  it,  and  welcome.  More  then  which  I  cannot  pei- 
form. 

The  following  preface  To  my  Country-men  Readers,  is  fo  allu- 
five  that  its  entire  infertion  may  be  pardoned,  though  it  wander  a 
little  from  our  fubjeifl : — 

Welcome  courteous  Countreymen.  I  meane  especially  Nor/olkjnen.  For 
tl  ey  are  true  Catholiques  in  matter  of  Dyet :  no  Recusants  of  any  thing  that 
is  mans  meate.  I  bid  all  in  general,  e.xcepting  only  such  as  are  affrayed  of 
roasted  Pigge,  a  breast  or  legge  of  Mutton,  a  Ducke  &c.  To  conclude,  I 
forbid  no  man,  but  him  onely  that  hath  maried  a  wife  and  cannot  come.  No 
man  shall  loose  his  labour.  Here  are  Lettiises  for  euery  mans  hps.  For  the 
Northeren-man,  White-meates,  Bee/e,  Mutton,  Ve?iison  :  for  the  Southcrne- 
man,  Fraites,  Hearbes,  Fowle,  Fish,  Spice,  and  Sauce.  As  for  \h&  Middle- 
sex or  Londoner,  I  smell  his  Diet.  Vescitur  aura  cetheria.  Here  is  a  Pipe 
of  right  Trinidado  for  him.  The  Yorkers  they  will  be  content  with  bald 
Tabacodocko.  What  should  I  say  ?  here  is  good  Veale  for  the  Essex-man  : 
passing  Leekes  and  excellent  Clieese  for  the  Welsh-man.  Dotique  qtndnon  ? 
Mary,  here  are  neither  Eg-pies  for  the  Lancashire-man,  nor  Wag-tayles  for 
the  Kentish-man.  But  that  is  all  one,  here  is  other  good  cheere  enough. 
And  what  is  wanting  in  meate,  shall  bee  supplyed  in  kinde  welcome  and  offi- 
cious attendance. 

Least  any  thing  should  be  amisse,  or  missing  to  thee,  I  haue  my  selfe  (for 
fault  of  a  better)  taken  vpon  me  all  such  Offices  as  any  way  concerne  this 
Dinner. 

1  Choise.  First,  I  am  Cator:  and  haue  prouided  the  very  choise  of  such 
daynties  as  Natures  Market  affoordeth. 

2  VsE.  Secondly,  I  am  Taster  :  commending  each  dish  to  thy  Palate,  ac- 
cording to  his  right  vse  and  vertue. 

3  Hurt.  And  (since  nothing  is  so  perfectly  good,  as  it  partaketh  of  no  euill 
property)  I  haue  put  into  a  by-dish  (like  Eg-shelles  in  a  Saucer)  what  worthily 
may  breed  offence.  Herein  imitating  a  merry  Greeke,  who  espying  an  haire 
in  a  dish  of  Butter,  called  for  another  dish  and  dished  it  by  it  self. 

4  Preparation  or  Correction.  Thirdly,  I  play  the  Cooke  :  so  prepar- 
ing, seasoning,  and  saucing  the  harmefull  disposition  of  euery  meat,  as  it 
shall  be  either  in  whole  abolished,  or  in  part  qualified. 

[5]  Degree,  Season,  Age,  Constitution.  Lastly,  I  assume  the  Car- 
■uers  office :  and  hauing  noted  the  nature  and  operation  of  each  particular 
dispense  to  euery  of  my  Guests  according  to  the  Season,  his  Age,  and  Con- 
stitution. 

Thus  very  rudely,  I  obtrude  vnto  thee  not  a  banquet,  but  a  byt  rather  of 
each  dish  Scholler-likely,  that  is,  badly  earned.  For  Schollersare  bad  Gar- 
ners. Do  thou,  by  thy  kindly  feeding  on  Dyets  dry  Dinner,  but  cause  thy 
selfe  to  thirst  for  Dyets  Drinking:  and  I  shall  with  like  alacrity,  act  thy  Gup- 
bearer.  Wherefore  vntill  thou  beest  Dry  drunke,  Fare-well.  Thy  Country- 
man,    H.  Buttes. 


Of  hie  Early  Use  of  Tobacco  in  England.        93 

Applying  his  method,  Buttes  thus  difcourfes  of  Tabacco  : 

Choise.  Translated  out  of  India  in  the  seed  or  roote  ;  Natiue  or  satiue  in 
our  own  fruitfullest  soiles  :  Dried  in  the  shade,  and  compiled  very  close :  of 
a  t.iwny  colour,  somwhat  inclining  to  red :  most  perspicuous  and  cleare : 
which  the  Nose  soone^t  taketh  in  snuffe. 

VsE.  It  cureth  any  griefe,  dolour,  opilation,  impostume,  or  obstruction, 
proceeding  of  cold  or  wmde  :  especially  in  the  head  or  breast :  the  leaues  are 
good  against  the  Migram,  cold  stomackes,  sick  kidnies,  tooth-ache,  fits  of 
the  moother,  naughty  breath,  scaldings  or  burnings  :  4.  ounces  of  the  iuyce 
drunk,  purgeth  vp  and  downe :  cleanseth  the  eyes,  being  outwardly  applied. 
The  water  distilled  and  taken  afore  the  fits,  cureth  an  Ague. 

The  fume  taken  in  a  Pipe  is  good  against  Rumes,  Catarrhs,  hoarsenesse, 
ache  in  the  head,  stomacke,  lungs,  breast :  also  in  want  of  meat,  drinke, 
sleepe,  or  rest. 

Hurt.  Mortifieth  and  benummeth  :  causeth  drowsinesse  :  troubleth  and 
dulleth  the  sences  :  makes  Cas  it  were''  drunke  :  dangerous  in  meale  time. 

CoRRECTtON.  The  leaues  be-ashed  or  warmed  in  imbcrs  and  ashes  :  taken 
once  a  day  at  most,  in  ye  morning,  fasting. 

Degree.  Hot  and  dr^' in  the  second  :  of  a  stiffening  and  soddering  nature. 
Also  disensing  and  dissoluing  filthy  humours,  consisting  of  contrary  qualities, 

Se.^son.  Age.  Constitution.  In  Winter  and  the  iSpring,  for  hot,  strong, 
youthful,  and  fat  bodies  only,  as  some  thinke. 

Buttes  alfo  compofes  A  Satyricall  Epigram,  vpon  the  wanton, 
and  excejjliie  vfe  of  Tabacco. 

IT  chaunc'd  me  gazing  at  the  Theater, 
To  spie  a  Lock-Tabacco-Chevalier, 

Clowding  the  loathing  ayr  with  foggie  fume 

Of  Dock-Tabacco,  friendly  foe  to  rume. 

I  wisht  the  Roman  lawes  seuerity  :  Alex.  seu.  Edict. 

WJio  s»toke  selleth,  with  stuoke  be  don  to  dy. 

Being  well  nigh  smouldred  with  his  smokie  stir, 

I  gan  this  wize  bespeak  my  gallant  Sir  : 

Ccrtes,  me  thinketh  ^Sir)  it  ill  beseems, 

Thus  here  to  vapour  out  these  reeking  steams  : 

Like  or  to  Maroes  steeds,  whose  nosthrils  flam'd  ; 

Or  Plinies  Nosemen  (mouthles  men)  surnam'd. 

Whose  breathing  nose  supply'd  Mouths  absency. 

He  me  regreets  with  this  prophane  reply  : 

Nay;  I  resemble  (Sir)  Jehouah  Ar^2iA, 

From  out  whose  nosthrils  a  smoake  issued  : 

Or  the  mid-ayrs  congealed  region, 

Whose  stomach  with  crude  humors  frozenon 

Sucks  vp  Tabacco-like  the  vpmost  ayr, 

Enkindled  by  Fires  neighbour  candle  fayr  : 

And  hence  it  spits  out  watry  reums  amame. 

As  phleamy  snow,  and  haile,  and  sheerer  raine  : 

Anon  it  smoakcs  beneath,  it  flames  anon. 

Sooth  then,  quoth  I,  it's  safest  we  be  gon. 

Lest  there  arise  some  Igtiis  Fattnis 

From  out  this  smoaking  flame,  and  choken  vs. 
On  English  foole  ;  wanton  Italiaiily  : 
Go  Frenchly  :  Duchly  drink  :  breath  Indianly. 

He  then  gives  this  Storie  for  Table-talke. 

This  Hearhe  is  of  great  Antiquitie  and  high  respect  among  the  Indians, 
and  especially  those  of  Avierica  or  new  Spain.  Of  whom  the  Spaniards 
tooke  it,  after  they  had  subdued  those  Countries,  first  vpon  a  liking  of  the 
hearbe  verie  faire  and  glorious  to  the  eye  ;  afterward  vpon  triall  of  his  vertues 
wotthie  admiration. 

The  Name  in  India  is  Pilciet,  surnamcd   Tabacco  by  the  Spaniard,  of  the 


94        On  the  Early  Use  of  Tobacco  in  England. 

ile  Tahnco.  By  their  meanes  it  spred  farre  and  neare  :  but  yet  wee  are  not 
beholden  to  their  tradition.  Our  English  Vlisses,  renomed  Syr  Walter 
Raivleigh,  a  man  admirably  excellent  in  Nauigation,  of  Natures  priuy  coun- 
sell,  and  infinitely  reade  in  the  wide  booke  of  the  worlde,  hath  both  farre 
fetcht  it,  and  deare  bought  it  :  the  estimate  of  the  treasure  I  leaue  to  other  : 
yet  this  all  know,  since  it  came  in  request,  there  hath  bene  Magtius  futni 
qtiestus,  and  Ftimi-vendulus  is  the  best  Epithite  for  an  Apothecary. 

Thus  much  late  Histories  tell  vs  :  among  the  Indians  it  is  so  highly  hon- 
oured, that  when  the  Priests  are  consulting  in  matter  of  importance,  they 
presently  cast  Tabacco  into  the  fire,  and  receiue  at  their  nose  and  mouth, 
the  smoak  through  a  Cane,  till  they  fall  downe  dead-drunke.  Afterward 
reuiuingagaine,  they  giue  answeres  according  to  the  phantasmes  and  visions, 
which  appeared  to  them  in  their  sleepe. 

1602.  (i)  *'  Work  for  Chimney-fweepers :  or  A  warning  for  To- 
bacconifls.  Defcribing  the  pernicious  vfe  of  Tobacco,  no  leffe 
pleafant  than  profitable  for  all  forts  to  reade  :  Fumus  patrice, 
Igne  alieno  Luciilentior.  As  much  to  fay,  Better  be  chokt  with 
Englifh  hemp,  then  poifoned  with  Indian  Tabacco."  Written 
by  Philaretes,  who  alleges  eight  reafons  againft  Tobacco  ; 
whereof  one  is — 

7  Seauenthly,  for  that  the  first  author  and  finder  hereof  was  the  Diuell, 
and  the  first  practisers  of  the  same  were  the  Diuells  Priests,  and  therefore  not 
to  be  vsed  of  vs  Christians. 

(2.)  This  provoked  "^  Defence  of  Tabacco:  with  a  friendly 
answer  to  the  late  printed  Booke  called  Worke  for  Chifujiey- 
Siueepers.     Si  iicdicas,  cognofe :  ft  Rex  es,  in  be." 

(3.)  Sir  William  Vaughan,  in  his  Natiirall  and  Artificiall 
Direhions  for  health,  &^c.  Sect.  ii.  ch.  8.      Of  Hearbes,  p.  22. 

Cane  Tabacco  well  dryed,  and  taken  in  a  siluer  pipe,  fasting  in  the  morn- 
ing, cureth  the  megrim,  the  tooth  ache,  obstructions  proceeding  of  cold,  and 
helpeth  the  fits  of  the  mother.  After  meales  it  doth  much  hurt,  for  it  infect- 
eth  the  braine  and  the  lines. 

In  his  fourth  edition  of  this  work,  publifhed  in  1613,  he  al- 
tered his  mind  and  wrote  againfl  Smoking. 

(4.)  Another  anonymous  work  dedicated  '  To  my  loving  Friend 
Mafler  Michael  Drayton,' appeared,  entitled  The  Metamorphofn 
of  Tabacco.     It  opens  with  the  following  lines  : — 
I  sing  the  loues  of  the  superiour  powers, 
With  the  faire  mother  of  all  fragrant  flowers  : 
From  which  first  loue  a  glorious  Simple  springs, 
Belou'd  of  heau'nly  Gods,  and  earthly  Kings. 
Let  others  in  their  wanton  verses  chaunt 
A  beautious  face  that  doth  their  senses  daunt, 
And  on  their  Muses  wings  lift  to  the  skie 
The  radiant  beames  of  an  inchaunting  eye. 
Me  let  the  sound  of  great  Tabaccoes  praise 
A  pitch  aboue  those  loue-sicke  Poets  raise  : 
Let  me  adore  with  ray  thrice-happie  pen 
The  sweete  and  sole  delight  of  mortall  men, 
The  Corfiu-copia  of  all  earthly  pleasure. 
Where  bank-rupt  Nature  hath  consum'd  her  treasure, 
A  worthie  plant  springing  from  Floraes  hand, 
The  blessed  ofspring  of  an  vncouth  land. 

1604.  In  the  course  of  thisyear ;  there  was  anonymoufly  publifhed 


A 

COVNTER 

BLASTE   TO 

Tobacco. 


-MM—  - 


FSC^ 


nu 


4r   Imprinted  at  London 

by  R.  B. 
Anno  1604. 


•r  To  The  Reader. 


S  euery  humane  body  {deare  Countrey  men) 
how  wholefo7ne  foeuer,  is  notwithjianding 
fubiedl^  or  at  leajl  naturally  inclined  to  fome 
forts  of  difeafes,  or  infirmities :  fo  is  there 
710  Common-wealth,  or  Body-politicke,  how 
well  gouerned,  or  peaceable  foeuer  it  bee,  that  lackes  the 
owne popular  errors,  a7id  naturally  e7iclined  corruptions : 
and  therefore  is  it  7io  wo7ider,  although  this  our  Coimtrey 
a7id  Co77imo7i-wealth,  though  peaceable,  though  wealthy, 
though  lo7ig flour ifJiing  in  both,  be  a7nongst  the  refl,  fubie^l 
to  the  ow7ie  naturall  i7fir7nities.  VVe  are  of  all  Nations 
the  people  most  louing  and  most  reuerently  obedie7it  to  our 
Prince,  yet  are  wee  {as  ti77ie  hath  ofte7i  bor7ie  wit7ieffe) 
too  eafie  to  be  f educed  to  77iake  Rebellion,  vp07i  ve7y  flight 
grounds.  Our  fortimate  and  oft  prooued  valour  in 
warres  abroad,  our  heartie  a7td  reuerent  obedience  to  our 
Princes  at  home,  hath  bred  vs  a  long,  and  a  thrice  happy 
peace :  Our  Peace  hath  bred  wealth :  And  Peace  and 
wealth  hath  brought  foorth  a  ge7ierall  fluggiflmefse,  which 
makes  vs  wallow  i7i  all  forts  of  idle  delights,  and  foft 
delicacies,  the  flrfl  f cedes  of  the  fubuerflon  of  all  great 
Mo)ia7'chies.  Our  Cleargie  are  beco77ie  negligent  and 
lazie,  ow*"  Noh^Htie  and  Geiitrie  prodigall,  and  folde  to 


To  The  Reader.  97 

their  priiiaie  delights ^  Our  Lawyers  couetous,  our  Com- 
ifwn-people  prodigall  a?id  curious  ;  a?id  generally  all  forts 
of  people  more  carcfull  for  their  priuat  cnds^  then  for 
their  mother  the  Common-wealth. 

For  remedie  whereof  it  is  the  Kings  part  {as  the  pro- 
per Phifcian  of  his  Foliticke-body)  to  purge  it  of  all  thofe 
difeafes,  by  Medicines  mcete  for  thefa}7ie :  as  by  a  certaine 
milde^  and  yet  iufl  forme  of  gouern??ient,  to  maiutaine  the 
Publicke  quiet ?ieffe.,  and preucfit  all  occafiojis  of  Conwio- 
tion :  by  the  example  of  his  owne  Petfon  and  Court^  to 
make  vs  all  afJiamed  of  our  fluggifJi  delicacie,  ajid  to 
Jlirre  vs  ip  to  the  praHife  againe  of  all  ho?iest  exer- 
cifeSj  and  Mart  ia  II  fJiadowes  of  War  re ;  As  like- 
wife  by  his,  and  his  Courts  inoderateneffe  in  Apparell, 
to  make  vs  afJiamed  of  our  prodigalitie :  By  his  quicke 
admo7iitions  a?id  carefull  ouerfeeing  of  the  Cleargie,  to 
7vaken  the?n  vp  agaijie,  to  be  more  diligent  i?i  their  Offices  : 
BythefJiarpetriall,  and feuere punifJi7nent  of  thepartiall, 
couetous  and bribi7ig Lawyers,  to  reforme  their  corruptions: 
And  generally  by  the  exaj?iple  of  his  owne  Perfon,  and 
by  the  due  execution  of  good  Lawes,  to  reforme  and  abolifh, 
piece  a?id piece,  thefe  old  and  euill  grounded  abufes.  For 
this  will  not  bee  Opus  ^/nius  diei,  but  as  euery  ofie  of  thefe 
difeafcs,  muflfrom  the  King  receiue  the  owne  cure  proper 
for  it,  fo  are  there  fome  forts  of  abufes  in  Co7nmon- 
vuealths,  that  though  they  be  of  fo  bafe  a?id  co?itemptible 
a  co?idition,  as  they  are  too  low  for  the  Law  to  looke  on, 
and  too  nicanefor  a  King  to  interpone  his  author itie,  or 
bend  his  eye  vpon :  yet  are  they  corruptions,  afwell  as  the 
gj'eatefl  of  them.  So  is  an  Ant  an  Animal,  afwell  as  an 
Elephant :  fo  is  a  VVre?ine  Auis,  afwell  as  a  Swanne, 
and  fo  is  a  fmall  dint  of  the  Toot  hake,  a  difeafe  afwell 
as  the  f carefull  Plague  is.  But  for  thefe  bafe  forts  of 
corruption  in   Common-wealthes,  not  onely  the  King,  or 

G 


98  To  The  Reader. 

any  inferior  Magijlrate^  but  Quilibet  e  populo  may 
feme  to  he  a  Fhifician,  by  difcouering  and  impugn- 
ing the  error,  and  by  perfwading  reformatioft  thereof 

Andfurely  i7i  my  opinion,  there  cannot  be  a  more  bafe, 
and  yet  hurtfull,  corruption  in  a  Countrey,  then  is  the 
vile  vfe  {or  other  abufe)  of  taking  Tobacco  in  this  King- 
dome,  which  hath  mooued  me,  fhortly  to  difcouer  the 
abufes  thereof  in  this  following  little  Pamphlet. 

If  any  thinke  it  a  light  Argument,  fo  is  it  but  a  toy 
that  is  beflowed  vpon  it.  Andfmce  the  SubieH:  is  but  of 
Smoke,  I  thinke  the  fume  of  an  idle  braine,  may  feme  for 
a  fufficient  battery  against  fo  fumous  aud  feeble  an  enemy. 
If  my  grounds  be  found  true,  it  is  all  I  looke  for ;  but  if 
they  cary  the  force  of perfwafion  with  them,  it  is  all  I  can 
wifli,  and  more  then  I  can  expe^.  My  onely  care  is,  that 
you,  my  deare  Countrey-men,  may  rightly  conceiue  euen 

by  this  fmallest  trifle,  of  the  finceritie  of  my  meaning 

in  greater  matters,  neuer  to  f pare  any 

paine,  that  may  tend  to  the 

procuring  of  your  weak 

and  profperitie. 


A 
COUNTERBLASTE     TO 

Tobacco. 


— ►tx+ 


irf 


Hat  the  manifolde  abufes  of  this  vile 
cuflome  of  Tobacco  taking,  may  the 
better  be  efpied,  it  is  fit,  that  firft  you 
enter  into  confideration  both  of  the 
firfl  originall  thereof,  and  hkewife  of 
the  reafons  of  the  firfl  entry  thereof 
into  this  Countrey.  For  certainely 
as  fuch  cufLomes,  that  haue  their  firfl 
inflitution  either  from  a  godly,  neceffary,  or  honorable 
ground,  and  are  firfl  brought  in,  by  the  meanes  of  fome 
worthy,  vertuous,  and  great  Perfonage,  are  euer,  and 
mofl  iuflly,  holden  in  great  and  reuerent  eflimation  and 
account,  by  all  wife,  vertuous,  and  temperate  fpirits:  So 
fliould  it  by  the  contrary,  iuflly  bring  a  great  difgraceinto 
that  fort  of  cuflomes,  which  hauing  their  originall  from 
bafe  corruption  and  barbarity,  doe  in  like  fort,  make 
their  firfl  entry  into  a  Countrey,  by  an  inconfiderate 
and  childifh  affeClation  of  Noueltie,  as  is  the  true  cafe 
of  the  firfl  inuention  of  Tobacco  taking,  and  of  the  firfl, 
entry  thereof  among  vs.  For  Tobacco  being  a  common 
herbe,  which   (though    vndcr  diuers   names)   grovves 


1  oo  A  counterblajle  to  Tobacco. 

almofl  euery  where,  was  firfl  found  out  by  fome  of  the 
barbarous  Indians^  to  be  a  Preferuatiue,  or  Antidot 
againft  the  Pockes,  a  filthy  difeafe,  whereunto  thefe 
barbarous  people  are  (as  all  men  know)  very  much 
fubie6l,  what  through  the  vncleanly  and  adull  confli- 
tution  of  their  bodies,  and  what  through  the  intemperate 
heate  of  their  Climat :  fo  that  as  from  them  was  firfl 
brought  into  Chriflendome,  that  moft  deteftable  dif- 
eafe, fo  from  them  likewife  was  brought  this  vfe  of 
Tobacco^  as  a  flinking  and  vnfauorie  Antidot,  for  fo 
corrupted  and  execrable  a  Maladie,  the  flinking  Suf- 
fumigation  whereof  they  yet  vfe  againfl  that  difeafe, 
making  fo  one  canker  or  venime  to  eate  out  another. 

And  now  good  Countrey  men  let  vs  (I  pray  you) 
confider,  what  honour  or  policie  can  mooue  vs  to  imi- 
tate the  barbarous  and  beaftly  maners  of  the  wilde, 
godleffe,  and  llauifh  Indians^  efpecially  in  fo  vile  and 
flinking  a  cuftome  ?  Shall  wee  that  difdaine  to  imitate 
the  maners  of  our  neighbour  France  (hauing  the  flile 
of  the  firfl  Chriflian  Kingdom)  and  that  cannot  endure 
the  fpirit  of  the  Spaniards  (their  King  being  now  com- 
parable in  largenes  of  Dominions,  to  the  great  Empe- 
ror of  Turkic)  Shall  wee,  I  fay,  that  haue  bene  fo  long 
ciuill  and  wealthy  in  Peace,  famous  and  inuincible  in 
Warre,  fortunate  in  both,  we  that  haue  bene  euer  able 
to  aide  any  of  our  neighbours  (but  neuer  deafed  any 
of  their  eares  with  any  of  our  fupplications  for  affift- 
ance)  fhall  we,  I  fay,  without  blulhing,  abafe  ourfelues 
fo  farre,  as  to  imitate  thefe  beaflly  Indians^  flaues  to 
the  Spaniards,  refufe  to  the  world,  and  as  yet  aliens 
from  the  holy  Couenant  of  God  ?  Why  doe  we  not 
as  well  imitate  them  in  walking  naked  as  they  doe?  in 
preferring  glaffes,  feathers,  and  fuch  toyes,  to  golde 
and  precious  flones,  as  they  do  ?  yea  why  do  we  not 
denie  God  and  adore  the  Deuill,  as  they  doe? 

Now  to  the  corrupted  bafeneffe  of  the  firfl  vfe  of 
this  Tobacco,  doeth  very  well  agree  the  foolifh  and 
groundleffe  firfl  entry  thereof  into  this  Kingdome.  It 
is  not  fo  long  fince  the  firfl  entry  of  this  abufe  amongfl. 
vs  here,  as  this  prefent  age  cannot  yet  very  well  re- 


A  counter  hi ajle  to  Tobacco.  i  o  i 

member,  both  the  firfl  Author,  and  the  forme  of  the 
firfl  introdu6lion  of  it  amongfl  vs.  It  was  neither 
brought  in  by  King,  great  Conquerour,  nor  learned 
Do6tor  of  Phificke. 

With  the  report  of  a  great  difcouery  for  a  Conquefl, 
fome  two  or  three  Sauage  men,  were  brought  in, 
together  with  this  Sauage  cuflome.  But  the  pitie  is, 
the  poore  wilde  barbarous  men  died,  but  that  vile 
barbarous  cuflome  is  yet  aliue,  yea  in  frefh  vigor  :  fo 
as  it  feemes  a  miracle  to  me,  how  a  cuflome  fpringing 
from  fo  vile  a  ground,  and  brought  in  by  a  father  fo 
generally  hated,  fliould  be  welcomed  vpon  fo  llender 
a  warrant.  For  if  they  that  firfl  put  it  in  practife  heere, 
had  remembred  for  what  refpedl  it  was  vfed  by  them 
from  whence  it  came,  I  am  fure  they  would  haue  bene 
loath,  to  haue  taken  fo  farre  the  imputation  of  that 
difeafe  vpon  them  as  they  did,  by  vfing  the  cure 
thereof  For  Sanis  non  ejl  opus  medico,  and  counter- 
poifons  are  neuer  vfed,  but  where  poyfon  is  thought 
to  precede. 

But  fince  it  is  true,  that  diuers  cuflomes  flightly 
grounded,  and  with  no  better  warrant  entred  in  a 
Commonwealth,  may  yet  in  the  vfe  of  them  thereafter, 
prooue  both  neceffary  and  profitable ;  it  is  therefore 
next  to  be  examined,  if  there  be  not  a  full  Sympathie 
and  true  Proportion,  between e  the  bafe  ground  and 
foolifh  entrie,  and  the  loathfome,  and  hurtfull  vfe  ot 
this  Rinking  Antidote. 

I  am  now  therefore  heartily  to  pray  you  to  confider, 
firfl  vpon  what  falfe  and  erroneous  grounds  you  haue 
firfl  built  the  generall  good  liking  thereof ;  and  next, 
what  finnes  towards  God,  and  foolifli  vanities  before 
the  world  you  commit,  in  the  deteflable  vfe  of  it. 

As  for  thefe  deceitfull  grounds,  that  haue  fpecially 
mooued  you  to  take  a  good  and  great  conceit  thereof, 
I  fhall  content  my  felfe  to  examine  here  onely  foure  of 
the  principals  of  them  ;  two  founded  vpon  the  Theo- 
ricke  of  a  deceiuable  apparance  of  Reafon,  and  two 
of  them  vpon  the  miRakcn  Braciicke  of  generall 
Experience. 


102  A  coiuiterblajle  to  Tobacco, 

Firfl,  it  is  thought  by  you  a  fure  Aphorifme  in  the 
Phyfickes,  That  the  braines  of  all  men,  beeing  natur- 
ally colde  and  wet,  all  dry  and  hote  things  fliould  be 
good  for  them  ;  of  which  nature  this  ftinking  fuffumi- 
gation  is,  and  therefore  of  good  vfe  to  them.  Of  this 
Argument,  both  the  Propofition  and  Affumption  are 
falfe,  and  fo  the  Conclufion  cannot  but  be  voyd  of  it 
felfe.  For  as  to  the  Propofition,  That  becaufe  the 
braines  are  colde  andmoift,  therefore  things  that  are  hote 
and  drie  are  befl  for  them,  it  is  an  inept  confequence  : 
For  man  beeing  compounded  of  the  foure  Complexions, 
(whofe  fathers  are  the  foure  Elements)  although  there 
be  a  mixture  of  them  all  in  all  the  parts  of  his  body, 
yet  mufl  the  diuers  parts  of  our  Microcofme  or  little 
world  within  our  felues,  be  diuerfly  more  inclined,  fome 
to  one,  fome  to  another  complexion,  according  to  the 
diuerfitie  of  their  vfes,  that  of  thefe  difcords  a  perfe6l 
harmonie  may  bee  made  vp  for  the  maintenance  of 
the  whole  body. 

The  application  then  of  a  thing  of  a  contrary  nature, 
to  any  of  thefe  parts,  is  to  interrupt  them  of  their  due 
fundlion,  and  by  confequence  hurtfull  to  the  health 
of  the  whole  body.  As  if  a  man,  becaufe  the  Liuer  is 
hote  (as  the  fountaine  of  blood)  and  as  it  were  an 
ouen  to  the  flomacke,  would  therfore  apply  and 
weare  clofe  vpon  his  Liuer  and  flomacke  a  cake  of 
lead;  he  might  within  a  very  fliort  time  (I  hope)  be 
fufteined  very  good  cheape  at  an  Ordinarie,  befide 
the  cleering  of  his  confcience  from  that  deadly  fmne 
of  gluttonie.  And  as  if,  becaufe  the  Heart  is  full  of 
vitall  fpirits,  and  in  perpetuall  motion,  a  man  would 
therefore  lay  a  heauy  pound  flone  on  his  breafl,  tor 
flaying  and  holding  downe  that  wanton  palpitation,  T 
doubt  not  but  his  breafl  would  bee  more  bruifed  with 
the  weight  thereof,  then  the  heart  would  be  comforted 
with  fuch  a  difagreeable  and  contrarious  cure.  And 
euen  fo  is  it  with  the  Braines.  For  if  a  man,  becaufe 
the  Braines  are  colde  and  humide,  would  therefore 
vfe  inwardly  by  fmells,  or  outwardly  by  application, 


A  countcrhlajle  to   Tobacco.  103 

things  of  hot  and  drie  qualitie,  all  the  gaine  that  he 
could  make  thereof,  would  onely  be  to  put  himfelfe 
in  a  great  forwardneffe  for  running  mad,  by  ouer- 
watching  himfelfe,  the  coldneffe  and  moiflneffe  of  our 
braine  beeing  the  onely  ordinarie  meancs  that  procure 
our  fleepe  and  refl.  Indeed  I  do  not  denie,  but 
when  it  falls  out  that  any  of  thefe,  or  any  part  of  our 
bodie  growes  to  be  diilempered,  and  to  tend  to  an 
extremitie,  beyond  the  compaffe  of  Natures  temperate 
mixture,  that  in  that  cafe  cures  of  contrary  qualities, 
to  the  intemperate  inclination  of  that  part,  being 
wifely  prepared  and  difcreetely  miniflered,  may  be  both 
neceffarie  and  helpefuU  for  flrengthning  and  affiding 
Nature  in  the  expulfion  of  her  enemies :  for  this  is 
the  true  definition  of  all  profitable  Phyficke. 

But  firfl  thefe  Cures  ought  not  to  bee  vfed,  but 
where  there  is  neede  of  them,  the  contrarie  whereof, 
is  daily  practifed  in  this  generall  vfe  of  Tobacco  by 
all  forts  and  complexions  of  people. 

And  next,  I  deny  the  Minor  of  this  argument,  as  I 
haue  already  faid,  in  regard  that  this  Tobacco,  is  not  fim- 
ply  of  a  dry  and  hot  qualitie ;  but  rather  hath  a  certaine 
venemous  facultie  ioyned  with  the  heate  thereof, 
which  makes  it  haue  an  Antipathic  againfL  nature,  as 
by  the  hatefuU  fmell  thereof  doeth  well  appeare.  For 
the  Nofe  being  the  proper  Organ  and  conuoy  of  the  fenfe 
of  fmelling  to  the  braines,  which  are  the  onely  fountaine 
of  that  fenfe,  doeth  euer  ferue  vs  for  an  infallible  wit- 
neffe,  whedier  that  Odour  wdiich  we  fmell,  be  health- 
full  or  hurtfull  to  the  braine  (except  when  it  fals  out 
that  the  fenfe  it  felfe  is  corrupted  and  abufed  through 
fome  infirmitie,  and  diflemper  in  the  braine.)  And 
that  the  fuffumigation  thereof  cannot  haue  a  drying 
qualitie,  it  needes  no  further  probation,  then  that  it 
is  a  fmoake,  all  fmoake  and  vapour,  being  of  it  felfe 
humide,  as  drawing  neere  to  the  nature  of  the  ayre, 
and  eafie  to  be  refolued  againe  into  water,  whereof 
there  needes  no  other  proofe  but  the  Meteors,  which 
being  bred  of  nothing  elfe  but  of  the  vapours  and  ex- 


I04  A  counterblajle  to   Tobacco. 

halations  fucked  vp  by  the  Sunne  out  of  the  earth,  the 
Sea,  and  waters  yet  are  the  fame  fmoakie  vapours 
turned,  and  transformed  into  Raynes,  Snowes,  Deawes, 
hoare  Froftes,  and  fuch  Hke  waterie  Meteors,  as  by  the 
contrarie  the  raynie  cloudes  are  often  transformed  and 
euaporated  in  bluflering  winds. 

The  fecond  Argument  grounded  on  a  fliow  of  rea- 
fon  is,  That  this  fiUhie  fmoake,  afwell  through  the 
heat  and  flrength  thereof,  as  by  a  naturall  force  and 
quaUtie,  is  able  and  fit  to  purge  both  the  head  and 
llomacke  of  Rhewmes  and  diflillations,  as  experience 
teacheth,  by  the  fpitting  and  auoyding  fleame,  im- 
meadiately  after  the  taking  of  it.  But  the  fallacie  of 
this  Argument  may  eafily  appeare,  by  my  late  pre- 
ceding defcription  of  the  Meteors.  For  euen  as  the 
fmoakie  vapours  fucked  vp  by  the  Sunne,  and  flaied 
in  the  lowefl  and  colde  Region  of  the  ayre,  are  there 
contra6led  into  cloudes  and  turned  into  raine  and 
fuch  other  watery  Meteors :  So  this  {linking  fmoake 
being  fucked  vp  by  the  Nofe,  and  imprifoned  in  the 
colde  and  moyfl  braines,  is  by  their  colde  and  wett 
facultie,  turned  and  cafl  foorth  againe  in  waterie  dif- 
tillations,  and  fo  are  you  made  free  and  purged  of 
nothing,  but  that  wherewith  you  wilfully  burdened 
your  felues  :  and  therefore  are  you  no  wifer  in  taking 
Tobacco  for  purging  you  of  diflillations,  then  if  for  pre- 
uenting  the  Cholike  you  would  take  all  kinde  of 
windie  meates  and  drinkes,  and  for  preuenting  of  the 
Stone,  you  would  take  all  kinde  of  meates  and  drinkes 
that  would  breede  grauell  in  the  Kidneyes,  and  then 
when  you  were  forced  to  auoyde  much  winde  out  of 
your  flomacke,  and  much  grauell  in  your  Vrine,  that 
you  fhould  attribute  the  thanke  thereof  to  fuch  nourilTi- 
ments  as  bred  thofe  within  you,  that  behoued  either  to 
be  expelled  by  the  force  of  Nature,  or  you  to  haue 
biirjl  at  the  broad fide^  as  the  Prouerbe  is. 

As  for  the  other  two  reafons  founded  vpon  ex- 
perience, the  firft  of  which  is.  That  the  whole  people 
would  not  haue  taken  fo  generall  a  good  liking  there- 


A  countirbliijlc  to   Tobacco.  105 

of,  if  they  had  not  by  experience  founti^  it  veric 
foueraigne  and  good  for  them  :  For  anfwere  thereunto 
how  eafily  the  mindes  of  any  people,  wherewith  God 
hath  replenifhed  this  world,  may  be  drawen  to  the 
foolifli  affecftation  of  any  noueltie,  I  leaiie  it  to  the 
difcreet  iudgement  of  any  man  that  is  reafonable. 

Doe  we  not  dayly  fee,  that  a  man  can  no  fooner 
bring  ouer  from  beyond  the  Seas  any  new  forme  of 
apparell,  but  that  hee  can  not  bee  thought  a  man  of 
fpirit,  that  would  not  prefently  imitate  the  fame? 
And  fo  from  hand  to  hand  it  fprcades,  till  it  be  prac- 
tifed  by  all,  not  for  any  commoditie  that  is  in  it,  but 
only  becaufe  it  is  come  to  be  the  fafliion.  For  fuch  is 
the  force  of  that  naturall  Selfe-loue  in  euery  one  of  vs, 
and  fuch  is  the  corruption  of  enuie  bred  in  the  brefL 
of  euery  one,  as  we  cannot  be  content  vnleffe  we  imi- 
tate euery  thing  that  our  fellowes  doe,  and  fo  prooue 
our  felues  capable  of  euery  thing  whereof  they  are  cap- 
able, like  Apes,  counterfeiting  the  maners  of  others,  to 
our  o\\Tie  den,ru6lion.  For  let  one  or  two  of  the 
greatefl  Maflers  of  Mathematickes  in  any  of  the  two 
famous  Vniuerfities,  but  conftantly  afiirme  any  cleare 
day,  that  they  fee  fome  flrange  apparition  in  the 
fkies  :  they  will  I  wan-ant  you  be  feconded  by  the 
greatefl  part  of  the  Students  in  that  profeffion  :  So 
loath  will  they  be,  to  bee  thought  inferiour  to  their 
fellowes,  either  in  depth  of  knowledge  or  fharpneffe  of 
fight :  And  therefore  the  generall  good  liking  and 
imbracing  of  this  foolifli  cuftome,  doeth  but  onely 
proceede  from  that  affectation  of  noueltie,  and  popu- 
lar errour,  whereof  I  haue  already  fpoken. 

The  other  argument  drawen  from  a  miflaken  ex- 
perience, is  but  the  more  particular  probation  of  this 
generall,  becaufe  it  is  alleaged  to  be  found  true  by 
proofe,  that  by  the  taking  of  Tobacco  diuers  and  very 
many  doe  finde  themfelues  cured  of  diuers  difeafes 
as  on  the  other  part,  no  man  euer  receiued  harme 
thereby.  In  this  argument  there  is  firR  a  great  mif- 
taking  and  next  a  monflrous  abfurditie.  For  is  it  not 
a  very  great  midaking,  to  take  Non  caufatii pro  caiifa^ 


io6  A  counterblajle  to  Tobacco, 

as  they  fay  in  the  Logicks?  becaufe  peraduenture 
when  a  ficke  man  ^hath  had  his  difeafe  at  the  height, 
hee  hath  at  that  inflant  taken  Tobacco^  and  afterward 
his  difeafe  taking  the  naturall  courfe  of  dedining,  and 
confequently  the  patient  of  recouering  his  health,  O 
then  the  Tobacco  forfooth,  was  the  worker  of  that 
miracle.  Befide  that,  it  is  a  thing  well  knowen  to  all  Phi- 
ficianSj'that  the  apprehenfion  and  conceit  of  the  patient 
hath  by  wakening  and  vniting  the  vitall  fpirits,  and  fo 
ftrengthening  nature,  a  great  power  and  vertue,  to  cure 
diuers  difeafes  For  an  euident  proofe  of  miflaking  in 
the  like  cafe,  I  pray  you  what  foolifh  boy,  what  lillie 
wench,  what  olde  doting  wife,  or  ignorant  countrey 
clowne,  is  not  a  Phifician  for  the  toothach,  for  the 
cholicke,  and  diuers  fuch  common  difeafes?  Yea, 
will  not  euery  man  you  meete  withal,  teach  you  a 
fundry  cure  for  the  fame,  and  fweare  by  that  meane 
either  himfelfe,  or  fome  of  his  neereft  kinfmen  and 
friends  was  cured  ?  And  yet  I  hope  no  man  is  fo 
foolifh  as  to  beleeue  them.  And  al  thefe  toyes  do 
only  proceed  from  the  miflaking  Non  caufam  pi'o 
caufa,  as  I  haue  already  fayd,  and  fo  if  a  man  chance 
to  recouer  one  of  any  difeafe,  after  he  hath  taken 
Tobacco,  that  mufl  haue  the  thankes  of  all.  But  by 
the  contrary,  if  a  man  fmoke  himfelfe  to  death  with  it 
(and  many  haue  done)  O  then  fome  other  difeafe 
mufl  beare  the  blame  for  that  fault.  So  doe  olde 
harlots  thanke  their  harlotrie  for  their  many  yeeres, 
that  cuflome  being  healthfull  (fay  they)  ad piirgaiidos 
Rejtes,  but  neuer  haue  minde  how  many  die  of  the 
Pockes  in  the  flower  of  their  youth.  And  fo  doe  olde 
drunkards  thinke  they  prolong  their  dayes,  by  their 
fwinelike  diet,  but  neuer  remember  howe  many  die 
drowned  in  drinke  before  they  be  halfe  olde. 

And  what  greater  abfurditie  can  there  bee,  then  to 
fay  that  one  cure  fhall  ferue  for  diuers,  nay,  contrar- 
ious  fortes  of  difeafes?  It  is  an  vndoubted  ground 
among  all  Phificians,  that  there  is  almofl,  no  fort  either 
of  nourifhment  or  medicine,  that  hath  not  fome  thing 
in  it  difagreeable  to  fome  part  of  mans  bodie,    be- 


A  counterblajlc  to  Tobacco.  107 

caufc,  as  I  haue  already  fayd,  the  nature  of  the  temper- 
ature of  euery  part,  is  fo  difterent  from  another,  that 
according  to  the  olde  prouerbe,  That  which  is  good 
for  the  head,  is  euill  for  the  necke  and  the  fhoulders. 
For  euen  as  a  flrong  enemie,  that  inuades  a  towne  or 
fortreffe,  although  in  his  fiege  thereof,  he  do  belaie 
and  compaffe  it  round  about,  yet  he  makes  his  breach 
and  entrie,  at  fome  one  or  few  fpecial  parts  thereof, 
which  hee  hath  tried  and  found  to  bee  weakefl  and 
lead  able  to  refifl ;  fo  fickeneffe  doth  make  her  parti- 
cular alTault,  vpon  fuch  part  or  parts  of  our  bodie,  as 
are  weakefl  and  eafiefl  to  be  ouercome  by  that  fort  of 
difeafe,  which  then  doth  affaile  vs,  although  all  the  refl 
of  the  body  by  Sympathie  feele  it  felfe,  to  be  as  it 
were  belaied,  and  befieged  by  the  affliction  of  that 
fpeciall  part,  the  griefe  and  fmart  thereof  being  by  the 
fence  of  feeling  difperfed  through  all  the  reft  of  our 
members.  And  therefore  the  fl<:ilfull  Phifician  preffes 
by  fuch  cures,  to  purge  and  flrengthen  that  part 
which  is  afflicted,  as  are  only  fit  for  that  fort  of  difeafe, 
and  doe  befl  agree  with  the  nature  of  that  infirme 
part ;  which  being  abufed  to  a  difeafe  of  another  na- 
ture, would  prooue  as  hurtfuU  for  the  one,  as  helpfull 
for  the  other.  Yea,  not  only  will  a  fl^ilfull  and  warie 
Phifician  bee  carefull  to  vfe  no  cure  but  that  which  is 
fit  for  that  fort  of  difeafe,  but  he  wil  alfo  confider  all 
other  circumflances,  and  make  the  remedies  futable 
thereunto :  as  the  temperature  of  the  clime  where  the 
Patient  is,  the  conflitution  of  the  Planets,  the  time  of 
the  Moone,  the  feafon  of  the  yere,  the  age  and  com- 
plexion of  the  Patient,  and  the  prefent  flate  of  his  body, 
in  Rrength  or  weakeneffe.  For  one  cure  mufl  not  euer 
be  vfed  for  the  felf-fame  difeafe,  but  according  to  the 
varying  of  any  of  the  forefaid  circum Ranees,  that  fort 
of  remedie  mufl  be  vfed  which  is  fittefL  for  the  fame. 
Whear  by  the  contrarie  in  th  is  cafe,  fuch  is  the  mir- 
aculous omnipotencie  of  our  flrong  tafled  Tobacco.,  as 
it  cures  all  forts  of  difeafes  (which  neuer  any  drugge 
could  do  before)  in  all  perfons,  and  at  all  times.     It 


io8  A  counter blajle  to  Tobacco. 

cures  all  maner  of  diflillations,  either  in  the  head  or 
llomacke  (if  you  beleeue  their  Axiomes)  although  in 
very  deede  it  doe  both  corrupt  the  braine,  and  by 
caufmg  ouer  quicke  difgeftion,  fill  the  ftomacke  full  of 
crudities.  It  cures  the  Gowt  in  the  feet,  and  (which 
is  miraculous)  in  that  very  inftant  when  the  fmoke 
thereof,  as  light,  flies  vp  into  the  head,  the  vertue 
thereof,  as  heauie,  runs  downe  to  the  little  toe.  It 
helpes  all  forts  of  Agues.  It  makes  a  man  fober  that 
was  drunke.  It  refrefhes  a  weary  man,  and  yet  makes 
a  man  hungry.  Being  taken  when  they  goe  to  bed,  it 
makes  one  lleepe  foundly,  and  yet  being  taken  when  a 
man  is  fleepie  and  drowfie,  it  will,  as  they  fay,  awake 
his  braine,  and  quicken  his  vnderflanding.  As  for 
curing  of  the  Pockes,  it  femes  for  that  vfe  but  among 
the  pockie  Indian  flaues.  Here  in  England  it  is  re- 
fined, and  will  not  deigne  to  cure  heere  any  other  then 
cleanly  and  gentlemanly  difeafes.  O  omnipotent  pow- 
er of  Tobacco !  And  if  it  could  by  the  fmoke  thereof 
chace  out  deuils,  as  the  fmoke  of  Tobias  fifh  did  (which 
I  am  fure  could  fmel  no  flronglier)  it  would  ferue  for 
a  precious  Relicke,  both  for  the  fuperftitious  Priefls, 
and  the  infolent  Puritanes,  to  cafl  out  deuils  withall. 

Admitting  then,  and  not  confeffmg  that  the  vfe 
thereof  were  healthfull  for  fome  fortes  of  difeafes; 
Ihould  it  be  vfed  for  all  fickneffes  ?  fhould  it  be  vfed 
by  all  men  ?  fhould  it  be  vfed  at  al  times  ?  yea  fhould 
it  be  vfed  by  able,  yong,  flrong,  healthful  men  ?  Med- 
icine hath  that  vertue,  that  it  neuer  leaueth  a  man  in 
that  flate  wherin  it  findeth  him :  it  makes  a  ficke 
man  whole,  but  a  whole  man  ficke.  And  as  Medicine 
helpes  nature  being  taken  at  times  of  neceffitie,  fo  be- 
ing euer  and  continually  vfed,  it  doth  but  weaken, 
wearie,  and  weare  nature.  What  fpeake  I  of  Medi- 
cine? Nay  let  a  man  euery  houre  of  the  day,  or  as  oft 
as  many  in  this  countrey  vfe  to  take  Tobacco,  let  a  man 
I  fay,  but  take  as  oft  the  befL  forts  of  nourifhments  in 
meate  and  drinke  that  can  bee  deuifed,  hee  fhall  with 
the  continuall  vfe  thereof  weaken  both  his  head  and  his 


A  countcrhlajle  to  Tobacco.  109 

flomacke :  all  his  members  Hiall  become  feeble,  his 
fpirits  dull,  and  in  the  end,  as  a  drowfie  lazie  belly- 
god,  he  fhall  euanifli  in  a  Lethargie. 

And  from  this  weakneffe  it  proceeds,  that  many  in 
this  kingdome  haiie  had  fuch  a  continuall  vfe  of  taking 
this  vnfauorie  fmoke,  as  now  they  are  not  able  to  for- 
beare  the  fame,  no  more  then  an  olde  drunkard  can 
abide  to  be  long  fober,  without  falling  into  an  vncur- 
able  weakeneffe  and  euiU  conRitution  :  for  their  con- 
tinuall cuflome  hath  made  to  them,  /mbitiitn,  alteram 
7iaturam  :  fo  to  thofe  that  from  their  birth  haue  bene 
continually  nouriOied  vpon  poifon  and  things  venem- 
ous,  wholefome  meates  are  onely  poifonable. 

Thus  hauing,  as  I  trufle,  fufficiently  anfwered  the 
mofl  principall  arguments  that  are  vfed  in  defence  of 
this  vile  cuflome,  it  refls  onely  to  informe  you  what 
fmnes  and  vanities  you  commit  in  the  filthie  abufe 
thereof  Firfl,  are  you  not  guiltie  of  fmnefull  and 
fhamefuU  lufl  ?  (for  lufl  may  bee  as  well  in  any  of  the 
fenfes  as  in  feeling)  that  although  you  bee  troubled 
with  no  difeafe,  but  in  perfe6l  health,  yet  can  you 
neither  be  merry  at  an  Ordinarie,  nor  lafciuious  in  the 
Stewes,  if  you  lacke  Tobacco  to  prouoke  your  appetite 
to  any  of  thofe  forts  of  recreation,  lufling  after  it  as  the 
children  of  Ifrael  did  in  the  wilderneffe  after  Quailes  ? 
Secondly  it  is,  as  you  vfe  or  rather  abufe  it,  a  branche 
of  the  fmne  of  drunkenneffe,  which  is  the  roote  of  all 
fmnes  :  for  as  the  onely  delight  that  drunkards  take 
in  Wine  is  in  the  flrength  of  the  tafle,  and  the  force  of 
the  fume  thereof  that  mounts  vp  to  the  braine  :  for  no 
drunkards  loue  any  weake,  or  fweete  drinke  :  fo  are 
not  thofe  (I  meane  the  flrong  heate  and  the  fume)  the 
onely  qualities  that  make  Tobacco  fo  delectable  to  all 
the  louers  of  it?  And  as  no  man  likes  flrong  headie 
drinke  the  firfl  day  (becaufe  7iemo  repente  Jit  turpiffl- 
vnis)  but  by  cuflome  is  piece  and  piece  allured,  while 
in  the  ende,  a  drunkard  will  haue  as  great  a  thirfl  to 
bee  drunke,  as  a  fober  man  to  quench  his  thirfl  with 
a  draught  when  hee  hath  need  of  it :  So  is  not  this  the 
very  cafe  of  all  the  great    takers  of  Tobacco}  which 


I  TO  A  count erblajle  to  Tobacco. 

therefore  they  themfekies  do  attribute  to  a  bewitching 
quahtie  in  it.  Thirdly,  is  it  not  the  greatell  fmne  of 
all,  that  you  the  people  of  all  fortes  of  this  Kingdome, 
who  are  created  and  ordeined  by  God  to  beflowe  both 
your  perfons  and  goods  for  the  maintenance  both  of 
the  honour  and  fafetie  of  your  King  and  Common- 
wealth, fhould  difable  your  felues  in  both  ?  In  your 
perfons  hauing  by  this  continuall  vile  cuftome  brought 
your  felues  to  this  fhameful  imbecilitie,  that  you  are 
not  able  to  ride  or  walke  the  iourney  of  a  lewes  Sab- 
both,  but  you  mufl  haue  a  reekie  cole  brought  you 
from  the  next  poore  houfe  to  kindle  your  Tobacco 
with  ?  whereas  he  cannot  be  thought  able  for  any  fer- 
uice  in  the  warres,  that  cannot  endure  oftentimes  the 
want  of  meate,  drinke  and  fleepe,  much  more  then 
mufl  hee  endure  the  want  of  Tobacco.  In  the  times  of 
the  many  glorious  and  vicftorious  battailes  fought  by  this 
Nation,  there  was  no  word  of  Tobacco.  But  now  if  it 
were  time  of  warres,  and  that  you  were  to  make  fome 
fudden  Caiialcado  vpon  your  enemies,  if  any  of  you 
fhould  feeke  leifure  to  flay  behinde  his  fellowe  for 
taking  of  Tobacco,  for  my  part  I  fhould  neuer  bee  forie 
for  any  euill  chance  that  might  befall  him.  To  take 
a  cuftome  in  any  thing  that  cannot  bee  left  againe,  is 
mofl  harmefull  to  the  people  of  any  land.  Mollicies 
and  delicacie  were  the  wracke  and  ouerthrow,  firfl  of 
the  Perfian,  and  next  of  the  Romane  Empire.  And 
this  very  cuflome  of  taking  Tobacco  (whereof  our  pre- 
fent  purpofe  is)  is  euen  at  this  day  accounted  fo  efife- 
minate  among  the  Indians  themfelues,  as  in  the  market 
they  will  offer  no  price  for  a  flaue  to  be  fold,  vv^home 
they  finde  to  be  a  great  Tobacco  taker. 

Now  how  you  are  by  this  cuflome  difabled  in  youi 
goods,  let  the  Gentry  of  this  land  beare  witneffe,  fome 
of  them  beflowing  three,  fome  foure  hundred  pounds 
a  yeere  vpon  this  precious  flinke,  which  I  am  fure 
might  be  beflowed  vpon  many  farre  better  vfes.  I 
ead  indeede  of  a  knauifli  Courtier,  who  for  abufmg 
the  fauour  of  the  Emperour  Alexander  Scuerus  his 
Mafler  by  taking  bribes  to  intercede,  for  fundry  per- 


A  counto-hlajlc  to   Tobacco.  1 1 1 

fons  in  his  Maflers  eare,  (for  whom  he  neuer  once 
opened  his  mouth)  was  iuflly  choked  with  fmoke,  with 
this  doome,  Fiinio  percat^  qui  fumum  vendidit :  but  of 
fo  many  fmoke-buyers,  as  are  at  this  prefent  in  this 
kingdome,  I  neuer  read  nor  heard. 

And  for  the  vanities  committed  in  this  filthie  cuf- 
tome,  is  it  not  both  great  vanitie  and  vncleanereffe, 
that  at  the  table,  a  place  of  refpe6l,  of  cleanlineffe,  of 
modeflie,  men  fhould  not  be  afhamed,  to  lit  toffmg  of 
Tobacco  pipes ^  and  puffing  of  the  fmoke  of  Tobacco  one 
to  another,  making  the  filthy  fmoke  and  flinke  thereof, 
to  exhale  athwart  the  diflies,  and  infect  the  aire,  when 
very  often,  men  that  abhorre  it  are  at  their  repaft  ? 
Surely  Smoke  becomes  a  kitchin  far  better  then  a 
Dining  chamber,  and  yet  it  makes  a  kitchin  alfo  often- 
times in  the  inward  parts  of  men,  foiling  and  infecting 
them,  with  an  vndluous  and  oily  kinde  of  Soote,  as 
hath  bene  found  in  fome  great  Tobacco  takers,  that 
after  their  death  were  opened.  And  not  onely  meate 
time,  but  no  other  time  nor  a(flion  is  exempted  from 
the  publike  vfe  of  this  vnciuill  tricke  :  fo  as  if  the  wiues 
ai  Diepe  lift  to  contefl  with  this  Nation  for  good  maners 
their  worfl  maners  would  in  all  reafon  be  found  at  leafl 
not  fo  difhonefl  (as  ours  are)  in  this  point.  The  publike 
vfe  whereof,  at  all  times,  and  in  all  places,  hath  now 
fo  farre  preuailed,  as  diuers  men  very  found  both  in 
iudgement,  and  complexion,  haue  bene  at  laft  forced 
to  take  it  alfo  without  defire,  partly  becaufe  they  were 
afhamed  to  feeme  fingular,  (like  the  two  Philofophers 
that  were  forced  to  duck  themfelues  in  that  raine 
water,  and  fo  become  fooles  afwell  as  the  reft  of  the 
people)  and  partly,  to  be  as  one  that  was  content  to 
eate  Garlicke  (which  hee  did  not  loue)  that  he  might 
not  be  troubled  with  the  fmell  of  it,  in  the  breath  of 
his  fellowes.  And  is  it  not  a  great  vanitie,  that  a  man 
cannot  heartily  welcome  his  friend  now,  but  flraight 
they  mud  bee  in  hand  with  Tobacco  ?  No  it  is  become 
in  place  of  a  cure,  a  point  of  good  fellowfhip,  and 
he  that  will  refufe  to  take  a  pipe  of  Tobacco  among 
his  fellowes,  (though  by  his  own   ele6lion   he  would 


112  A  coimterblajle  to  Tobacco. 

rather  feele  the  fauour  of  a  Sinke)  is  accounted  peeiiifli 
and  no  good  company,  euen  as  they  doe  with  tippeUng 
in  the  cold  Eaflerne  Countries.  Yea  the  MiRreffe 
cannot  in  a  more  manerly  kinde,  entertaine  her  fer- 
uant,  then  by  giuing  him  out  of  her  faire  hand  a  pipe 
of  Tobacco.  But  herein  is  not  onely  a  great  vanitie, 
but  a  great  contempt  of  Gods  good  giftes,  that  the 
fweeteneffe  of  mans  breath,  being  a  good  gift  of  God, 
fhould  be  willfully  corrupted  by  this  fLinking  fmoke, 
wherein  I  mufl  confeffe,  it  hath  too  flrong  a  vertue  : 
and  fo  that  which  is  an  ornament  of  nature,  and  can 
neither  by  any  artifice  be  at  the  firfl  acquired,  nor 
once  lofl,  be  recouered  againe,  fhall  be  filthily  cor- 
rupted with  an  incurable  flinke,  which  vile  qualitie  is 
as  directly  contrary  to  that  wrong  opinion  which  is 
holden  of  the  wholefomneffe  thereof,  as  the  venime  of 
putrifaction  is  contrary  to  the  vertue  Preferuatiue. 

Moreouer,  which  is  a  great  iniquitie,  and  againfl  all 
humanitie,  the  husband  fhall  not  bee  afhamed,  to 
reduce  thereby  his  delicate,  wholefome,  and  cleane 
complexioned  wife,  to  that  extremitie,  that  either  fhee 
mufl  alfo  corrupt  her  fweete  breath  therewith,  or  elfe 
refolue  to  Hue  in  a  perpetuall  ftinking  torment. 

Haue  you  not  reafon  then  to  bee  afhamed,  and  to 
forbeare  this  filthie  noueltie,  fo  bafely  grounded,  fo 
foolifhly  receiued  and  fo  groffely  miflaken  in  the  right 
vfe  thereof?  In  your  abufe  thereof  finning  againfl 
God,  harming  your  felues  both  in  perfons  and  goods, 
and  raking  alfo  thereby  the  markes  and  notes  of  vanitie 
vpon  you  :  by  the  cuflome  thereof  making  your  felues 
to  be  wondered  at  by  all  forraine  ciuil  Nations,  and 
by  all  flrangers  that  come  among  you,  to  be  fcorned 
and  contemned.  A  cuflome  lothfome  to  the  eye,  hate- 
full  to  the  Nofe,  harmefull  to  the  braine,  dangerous  to 

the  Lungs,  and  in  the  blacke  flinking  fume  there- 
of, neerefl  refembling  the  horrible  Sti- 
gian  fmoke  of  the  pit  that  is 
bottomeleffe. 


On  the  Early  Use  of  Tobacco  lx  England.         113 

The  foregoing  Inve(flive  was  written  by  the  King  of  Great 
Britain.  How  early  its  royal  authorfliip  was  avowed,  I  know 
not  :  but  it  was  generally  known  long  before  its  infertion  in 
the  collected  edition  of  the  King's  Wor/ces,  publiflied  in 
1616. 

King  James  flopped  not,  in  his  Crufade  againft  Tobacco, 
at  words.  In  the  following  Conimiffio  p?'o  Tabacco  he  added 
Fines  and  Blows. 

James,  by  the  Grace  of  God  &>€.  to  our  ripht  Trustieand  rijjht  Welbeloved 
Cousen  and  Counsellor,  Thomas  Ea?le  of  Dorset  our  High  Treasourer  of 
Enclande,  Greetinge. 

Whereas  Tnbncco,  beinj^  a  Drugge  of  late  Yeres  found  out.  and  by  Mer- 
chants, as  well  Denizens  as  Strangers,  brought  from  forreign  Partes  in  small 
quantitie  into  this  Realm  of  England  and  other  our  Dominions,  was  used 
and  taken  by  the  better  sort  both  then  and  nowe  onelye  as  Phisicke  to  pre- 
serve Hcalthe,  and  is  now  at  this  Day,  through  evell  Custome  and  the  Tol- 
leration  thereof,  excessivclie  taken  by  a  nomber  of  ryotous  and  disordered 
Persons  of  meane  and  base  Condition,  whoe,  contrarie  to  the  use  which  Per- 
sons of  good  Callinge  and  Qualitye  make  thereof,  doe  spend  most  of  there 
tyme  in  that  idle  Vanitie,  to  the  evill  example  and  corrupting  of  others,  and 
also  do  consume  that  Wages  whiche  manye  of  them  gett  by  theire  Labour, 
and  wherewith  there  Families  should  be  releived,  not  caring  at  what  Price 
they  buye  that  Drugge,  but  rather  devisinge  how  to  add  to  it  other  Mixture, 
therebye  to  make  it  the  more  delightful!  to  their  Taste,  though  so  much  the 
more  costly  to  there  Purse  ;  by  which  great  and  imoderate  takinge  of  Ta- 
bacco the  Health  of  a  great  nomber  of  our  People  is  impayred,  and  theire 
Bodies  weakened  and  made  unfit  for  Labor,  the  Estates  of  many  mean  Per- 
sons soe  decayed  and  consumed  as  they  are  thereby  dryven  to  unthriftie 
Shifts  onelie  to  maynteyne  their  gluttonous  exerc  se  thereof,  besides  that 
also  a  great  part  of  ihe  'I'reasure  of  our  Landeis  spent  and  exhausted  by  this 
onely  Drugge  so  licentiously  abused  by  the  meaner  sorte,  all  which  enormous 
Inconveniences  ensuinge  thereuppon  We  doe  well  perceave  to  proceed  prin- 
cipally from  the  great  quantitie  of  Tabacco  daily  brought  into  this  our  Realm 
of  England  and  Dommions  of  Wales  from  the  Partes  beyond  the  Seas  by 
Merchauntes  and  others,  which  Excesse  We  conceave  might  in  great  part 
be  restrayned  by  some  good  Imposition  to  be  laid  uppon  it,  whereby  it  is 
likelie  that  a  lesse  Quantitie  of  Tabacco  will  hereafter  be  broughte  into  this 
our  Realm  of  England,  Dominion  of  Wales  and  Town  of  Barwick  then  in 
former  tymes,  and  yet  sufficient  store  to  serve  for  their  necessarie  use  who 
are  of  the  better  sort,  and  have  and  will  use  the  same  with  Moderation  to 
preserve  their  Healthe ; 

We  do  therefore  will  and  command  you  our  Treasurer  of  Englande,  and 
herebye  also  warrant  and  aucthorise  you  to  geve  order  to  all  Customers 
Comptrollers  Searchers  .Surveyors,  and  all  other  Officers  of  our  Portes,  that, 
from  and  after  the  sixe  and  twentith  Day  of  Octol^er  next  comynge,  they 
shall  demaimde  and  take  to  our  use  of  all  Merchauntes,  as  well  Englishe  as 
Strangers,  and  of  all  others  whoe  shall  bringe  in  anye  Tabacco  into  this 
Realme,  within  any  Porte  Haven  or  Creek  belonging  to  any  theire  severall 
Charges,  the  Somme  of  Six  Shillins:es  and eighie  Pence  uppon  everye  Pound 
Waight  thereof,  over  and  above  the  Custome  of  Twoo  Pefice  uppon  the 
Pounde  Waighte  usuallye  paide  heretofore  ; 

And  for  the  better  execution  hereof,  bothe  in  the  Reformation  of  the  saide 
Abuses,  and  for  the  avoydinge  of  all  Fraude  and  Deceipte  concerninge  the 
Paymente  of  the  saide  Imposition  and  Custome,  Our  Will  and  Pleasure  is 
that  you  shall  in  our  Name  straightlye  charge  and  commaunde  all  Collectors 
Customers  Comptrollers  Surveyors,  and  other  Officers  whatsoever  to  whome 
the  same  maye  belonge,  that  they  suffer  noe  Entries  to  be  made  of  anye 
Tabacco  at  anye  tyme  hereafter  to  be  broughte  into  anye  Porte  Haven  or 
Creeke  within  this  our  Realme  of  Englande,  the  Dominion  of  Wales,  and 

H 


114     On  the  Early  Use  of  Tobacco  in  England, 

Towne  of  Barwicke,  or  anye  parte  of  the  same,  by  an  ye  Englishe  or  Stranger, 
or  anye  other  Persone  vvhatsoever,  befure  the  saide  Ciistome  and  Imposition 
before  specified  be  firste  satisfied  and  paide,  or  Composition  made  for  the 
same  with  oure  saide  Customers,  Collectors,  or  other  Officers  to  whome  the 
enme  apperteyneth,  uppon  Payne  that  if  anye  Merchaunte  Englishe  or 
Straunger,  or  other  whatsoever,  shall  presume  to  bringe  in  anye  of  the  saide 
Tabacco,  before  suche  Payemente  and  Satisfactione  firste  made,  That  then 
he  shall  not  onelie  forfeite  the  saide  Tabacco,  but  alsoe  shall  undergoe  suche 
furthere  Penalties  and  corporall  Punish'mente  as  the  Qualitie  of  suche  soe 
highe  a  Contempte  against  our  Royall  and  expresse  Commaundemente  in 
this  mannere  published  shall  deserve. 

Wytnes  our  self  at  Westjitinster  the  seaventeenth  Day  of  October.  [1604]. 

Per  ipsttin  Regem. 

Rymer  Focdera,  xvi.  601.     Ed.  1715. 

vSir  Robert  Ayton  [b.  K570 — d.  an  unmarried  man  in  1638] 
left  among  his  MSS.  the  following  Sonnet,  firfb  printed  among 
his  Poetus,  Edinburgh,  1844.     Ed.  by  C.  Roger. 

On  Tobacco. 
Forsaken  of  all  comforts  but  these  two, 
My  faggot  and  my  pipe,  I  sit  and  muse 
On  all  my  crosses,  and  almost  accuse 
The  Heav'ns  for  dealing  with  me  as  they  do. 
Then  Hope  steps  in,  and  with  a  smiling  brow 
Such  cheerful  expectations  doth  infuse 
As  makes  me  think  ere  long  I  cannot  choose 
But  be  some  grandee,  whatsoe'er  I'm  now. 
But  having  spent  my  pipe,  I  then  perceive 
That  hopes  and  dreams  are  cousins — both  deceive. 
Then  mark  I  this  conclusion  in  my  mind. 
It's  all  one  thing — -both  tend  into  one  scope — 
To  live  upon. Tobacco  and  on  Hope, 
The  one's  but  smoke,  the  other  is  but  wind.    /.  53. 

1606.  *'  The  copy  of  a  Letter  written  by  E.  D.  Dodour  of  Phy- 
ficke  to  a  Gentleman,  by  whom  it  was  publifhed.  The  former 
part  conteineth  Rules  for  the  preferiiation  of  health,  and  preiccnt- 
ing  of  all  difeafes  vntU  extretne  olde  age.  Herein  is  inferted  the 
Aiithotivs  opinion  of  Tabacco^ 

E.  D.  argues  that  Tabacco  is  (i)  not  safe  for  youth  :  {■2)  it  shorteneth  life  : 
(3)  it  breedeth  many  diseases :  (4)  it  breedeth  melancholy  :  fs)  it  hurteth  the 
minde  :   (6)  it  is  ill  for  the  Smokers'  issue  :  (7)  it  shorteneth  life  i  and 

"  To  conclude,  sith  it  is  so  hurtfull  and  dangerous  to  youth,  I  wish  (in  com- 
passion of  them'  that  it  might  haue  the  pernitious  nature  expressed  in  the 
name,  and  that  it  were  as  well  knowen  by  the  name  of  Youths-bane,  as  \>y 
the  name  of  Tabacco."    //.  3-5. 

1607  A  fixefolde  Politician,  by  I[ohn]  M[elton],  has  the 
following  allufion  to  Tobacco  Smoking  : — 

And  as  the  enterludes  may  be  tearmed,  the  Sclioolc-houses  of  vanitie,  and 
wantonnes  ;  so  these  [vaine  poets  and  plaiers]  are  the  schoolemaisters  there- 
of:  and  methinks  they  (who  haue  tasted  of  the  sweete  fountaine  water,  run- 
ning from  their  Academick  mothers  breasts,  by  this,  if  nothing  else^  shold 
be  deterred  from  their  scribling  profession,  that  they  see  their  writings  and 
conceits  sold  at  a  common  doore  to  euery  base  companion  for  a  penny.  But 
most  of  their  conceits  are  too  deere  at  that  rate,  and  therefore  may  well  bee 
had  in  the  same-request  that  Tobacco  is  now,  which  was  wont  to  be  taken  of 


On  the  Early  Use  of  Tobacco  in  ENGLAiND.      115 

ETcat  gentlemen,  and  gallants,  now  made  a  frequent  and  familiar  Companion 

of  euery  Tapster  and  Horse-keeper.    And  their  conceits  are 

likest  Tobacco  of  any  thing  :  for  as  that  is  quickly  kindled,     Covceits   sauo- 

makes  a  stinking  snioake,  and  quickly  goes  out,  but  Icaues     ring  of  no 

and  inhering  stinke  in   the  nostrils  and  stomackes  of  the     inagnient     or 

lakers,  not  to  be  drawne  out,  but  by  putting  in  a  worse  sa-     studdie  like 

uour,  as  of  Onions  and  G.irlick,   according  to  theprouerbe  :     Tobacco 

the  smel  of  Garlicke  takes  away  the  stink  of  dunghils,^  so     smoke. 

the  writing  of  ordinarye  Piay-bookes,  Pamphlets,  and  such 

like,  may  be  tearmed  the  mushrum  conceptions  of  idle  braines,  moste  of  them 

are  begotte  ouer  night  in  Tobacco  smoake  and  muld-sacke,  and  vttered  and 

deliuered  to  the  worlds  presse  by  the  helpe  and  midwifery  of  a  caudle  the 

next  morning.    //.  34-36. 

1610.  (I.)  *E[i)MUNd]  G[ardixer].  Gent,  and  Pracfticioner in 
Phyficke,'  wrote  a  medical  defence,  under  the  title  of  T/ie  Triall 
of  Tabacco.  Wherein,  his  "H'orth  is  mo 'I  7vortliily  exprejfcd,  as,  in 
the  name,  nature,  and  qualitie  of  the  fayd  hearb,  Jiis  fpeciall  zfe  in 
all  Ph\ficke,  zvith  the  t>  iie  and  right  zfe  of  taking  it,  &c. 

(2.)  Under  this  year  may  alfo  be  put — George  Sandys.  A 
Relation  of  a  journey  begun  An.  Dovi.  1 6 10.  Foure  Bookes. 
Containing  a  defcription  of  the  TicrkifJi  Empire,  of  ALgypt,  of  the 
Holy  Land,  of  the  Remote  parts  of  Italy,  and  Jflands  adioyning. 
London.     161 5. 

The  Turkes  are  also  incredible  takers  of  Opium,  whereof  the  lesser  Asia 
affordeth  them  plenty  :  carrying  it  about  them  both  in  peace  and  in  warre  ; 
which  they  say  e.\pelleth  all  feare,  and  makes  them  couragious  :  but  I  rather 
thinke  giddy  headed,  and  turbulent  dreamers  ;  bj'  them,  as  should  seeme  by 
what  hath  bene  said,  religiou>ly  affected.  And  perhaps  for  the  selfe  same 
cause  they  also  delight  in  Tobacco;  they  take  it  through  reeds  that  haue 
ioyned  vnto  them  great  heads  of  wood  to  containe  it :  I  doubt  not  but  lately 
taught  them,  as  brought  them  by  the  English  :  and  were  it  not  sometimes 
lookt  into  for  Morat  Bassa  not  long  since  commanded  a  pipe  to  be  thrust 
through  the  nose  of  a  Turke,  and  so  to  be  led  in  derision  through  the  Citie,) 
no  question  but  it  would  proue  a  principall  commodity.  Neuerthelesse  they 
will  take  it  in  corners,  and  are  so  ignorant  therein,  that  that  which  in  Eng- 
land is  not  saleable,  doth  passe  here  amongst  them  for  most  excellent.  Blc. 
\.p.  66. 

So  England  took  Tobacco  firfl  to  Turkey. 

1611.  Perfuming  of  Tobacco,  and  the  great  Ahufe  committed  in 
it.     See  Lowndes,  p.  2689. 

1614.  (I.)  William  Barclay,  ALA.,  M.D.,  publifhed  at 
Edinbur;.^h, — what  was  perhaps  the  faft  flat  contradiction  to  the 
Counterblafle — viz. :  Nepenthes,  or  the  Vertues  of  Tabacco.  This 
tracl — which  I  fhould,  had  fpace  permitted,  have  been  glad  to 
have  entirely  reprinted  here — v.'as  publiflied  by  the  Spalding 
Club  in  their  Mifcellany,  i.  //.  iyi-i'j\.     It  begins  thus — 

Hercvles  to  obey  the  commandement  and  will  of  IvNO,  bu.sied  him- 
sclfe  to  ouerthrow  the  most  famous  monsters  of  his  time,  his  Amies  were  a 
bagge  and  a  club.  A  most  worthie  Ladie,  and,  if  I  durst  say  so,  the  very 
IvNO  of  our  He  hath  commanded  me  to  destroy  some  monstruous  Diseases 
so  that  to  imitate  the  most  chiualrous  Chiftan  of  the  worlde,  I  haue  armed 
my  selfe  with  a  boxe  for  his  bagge,  and  a  pipe  for  his  club  :  a  boxe  to  conserue 
my  Tabacco,  and  a  pipe  to  vse  it,  by  those  two  Godwilling,  to  ouercome 
many  maladies.  If  the  hostes  of  such  Diseases  doe  not  betray  my  endeuoures 
to  their  hating  and  hated  guests  by  not  vsing  or  abusing  my  weapons.  But 
before  I  enter  in  the  list,  I  must  whet  as  it  were  my  wits  with  these  two 
points.  First  why  doe  I  treat  of  a  matter  so  often  handled  by  so  many,  so 
odious  to  Princes,  so  pernicious  to  sundrie,  and  so  co.^tly  to  all? 


ii6     On  the  Early  Use  of  Tobacco  in  England, 


I 


Secondly  why  doe  I  as  another  Clodivs  reueale  vtysteria  boncB  Dear, 
and  prophane  the  secrets  of  Physicke  ?  I  answere  that  a  good  matter  is  not 
the  worse  to  be  maintained  by  many  :  and  Phts  videiit  ociili  qztaut  ociilus.  ~ 
As  concerning:  the  hatred  of  Princes,  one  mans  meate  is  another  mans  poy- 
son.  The  wine  prince  of  Hquors  hateth  vehemently  colworts,  and  yet  beere, 
aile,  sider  water,  oyle,  honey,  and  all  other  liquors  doe  well  agree  with  col- 
worts. The  king  cf  France  drinketh  neuer  Orleans  wine  notwithstanding 
his  subjects  doe  loue  it  well. 

I  know  sundrie  men  that  haue  such  Antipathic  with  butter  that  they  dare 
not  smell  it.  It  hath  bene  pernicious  to  sundrie  I  grant  it,  so  hath  wine,  so 
hath  bread,  so  hath  gold,  so  hath  land,  and  what  so  whoLsome  thing  is  that 
cannot  be  turned  to  abuse?  If  it  be  costly  vse  the  lesse  of  it.  What?  is  not 
Rheubarbe  coastly  ?  is  not  Muske  coastly  ?  is  not  Auibergreese  coastly  ?  As 
touching  the  second  point  of  my  reuealing  this  secret  of  Physicke,  I  answere, 
I  mean  but  to  reforme  the  harme  which  proceedeth  of  the  abuse,  and  to  shew 
to  my  countrey  men  that  I  am  more  willing  to  pleasure  them  then  to  profite 
my  selfe,  neither  did  I  sweare  to  conceale  that  point  when  in  a  robe  of  pur- 
pure  I  wedded  the  metamorphosed  Daphne.  It  resteth  now  to  vnfold  what 
moued  me  to  entitule  this  treatise  Nepenthes,  because  it  hath  certaine  melli- 
fluous delicacie,  which  deliteth  the  senses,  and  spirits  of  man  with  a  mindful 
obliuion,  insomuch  that  it  maketh  and  induceth  KaKiov  eTn^rjdov  a  irduTlov 
the  forgetting  of  all  sorrowes  and  miseries.  And  there  is  such  hostilitie  be- 
twene  it  and  melancholie,  that  it  is  the  only  medicament  in  the  world  or- 
dained by  nature  to  entertaine  good  companie  :  insomuch  that  it  worketh 
neuer  so  well,  as  when  it  is  giuen  from  man  to  man,  as  a  pledge  of  friend- 
shippe  and  amitie. 

The  countrey  which  God  hath  honoured  and  blessed  with  this  happie  and 
holy  herbe,  doth  call  it  in  the  natiue  language  Petnin,  the  Spaniards,  who 
haue  giuen  it  the  right  of  naturalitie  in  their  soyle,  terme  it  Tabacco,  the 
Frenchmen  which  haue  receiued  it  in  their  countrey  as  in  a  colonie  call  it 
Nicotiati,  in  this  our  He  of  Brittaine,  as  in  all  other  maritime  parts,  we  vse 
the  Spanish  name  of  Tabacco.  But  esteeming  it  worthie  of  a  more  loftie 
name,  I  haue  chosen  for  gossip  the  faire  and  famous  Helena,  and  giuen  to 
her  the  honour  to  name  this  most  profitable  plant,  Nepe7ithes. 

Albeit  this  herbe  disdaines  not  to  be  nourished  in  many  gardens  in  Spaine, 
in  Italie,  France,  Flanders,  Gennanie  and  Brittaine,  yet  neuerthelesse  only 
that  which  is  fostered  in  India  and  brought  home  by  Mariners  and  Traffiquers 
is  to  be  vsed,  as  after  you  shall  heare  the  reason  is. 

Non  omnisfert  omnia  tellns. 
But  auarice  and  greedines  of  gaine  haue  moued  the  Marchants  to  apparell 
some  European  plants  with  Indian  coats,  and  to  enstali  them  in  shops  as 
lighteous  and  legittime  Tabacco     .... 

So  that  the  most  fine,  best,  and  purest  is  that  which  is  brought  to  Europe 
in  leaues,  and  not  rolled  in  puddings,  as  the  English  Nauigators  first  brought 
home.     .     .     . 

In  Tabacco  there  is  nothing  which  is  not  medecin,  the  root,  the  stalke,  the 
leaues,  the  seeds,  the  smoke,  the  ashes,  and  to  be  more  particular,  Tabacco 
may  serue  for  the  vse  of  man  either  greene  or  dry.     ...  a 

To  the  cure  and  preseruation    of  an  armie  of  maladies,  Tabacco  must  be  4 

vsed  after  this  maner.  Take  of  leafe  Tabacco  as  much  as  being  folded  to- 
gether, may  make  a  round  ball  of  such  bignesse  that  it  may  fill  the  patients 
mouth,  and  inclyne  his  face  downward  towards  the  ground,  keeping  the 
mouth  open,  not  mouing  any  whit  with  his  tongue,  except  now  and  then  to 
waken  the  medicament,  there  shall  flow  such  a  flood  of  water  from  his  brain 
and  his  stomacke,  and  from  all  parts  of  his  body  that  it  shall  be  a  wonder. 
This  he  must  do  fasting  in  the  morning,  and  if  it  be  for  preseruation,  and 
the  body  very  cacochyme,  or  full  of  euil  humours,  he  must  take  it  once  a 
weeke,  otherwise  once  a  month  :  But  if  it  bee  to  cure  the  Epilepsie  or  Hy- 
dropisie  once  euery  day.  Thus  haue  I  vsed  Tabacco  my  self,  and  thus  vsed 
Tabacco,  lean  Grcis  a  venerable  old  man  at  Nantes  in  the  French  Britain, 
who  liued  whill  he  was  six  score  yeares  of  age,  and  who  was  known  for  the 
only  refuge  of  the  poore  afflicted  souldiers  of  Venus  when  they  were  wounded 


J 


« 


On  the  Early  Use  of  Tobacco  in  England.      117 

with  the  French  Pickes,  1  should  haue  said  Pockes.  7'hus  much  for  the  vse 
of  Tabacco  in  substance.  As  concerning  the  smoke,  it  may  be  taken  more 
frequently,  and  for  the  said  eftects,  but  always  fasting,  and  w  iih  an  emptie 
stomack,  not  as  the  English  abusers  do,  which  make  a  smoke-boxe  of  their 
skull,  more  fit  to  be  caried  vnder  his  arme  that  scllt.th  at  Paris,  ciunoir  a 
noircir  to  blacke  mens  shoes,  then  to  carie  the  braine  of  him  that  can  not 
walke,  can  not  ryde  except  the  Tabncco  Pype  be  in  his  mouth.  I  clianced 
in  company  on  a  tyme  with  an  English  merchant  in  Xortitnndie  betweene 
Kmt'cn  and  Xe7v-/iaufn.  This  fellow  was  a  merrie  man,  but  at  euery  house 
he  must  have  a  Cole  to  kindle  his  Tabacco  :  the  P>enciimen  wondered,  and 
I  laughed  at  his  intemperancie.  But  there  is  one  William  Anslop  an  honest 
man  dwelling  in  Bishi>ps-gate  street,  hard  within  the  gate  that  selleth  the 
best  Tabacco  in  England,  and  vseth  it  most  discreetly. 

(2.)  ''''The  Hoiu'Jlie  of  tJiis  Age.  Proouing  by  good  circum- 
(lance  that  the  world  wa.s  neuer  honeft  till  now.  By  Rarnabee 
Rych  Gentleman,  Seniant  to  the  Kings  mod  Excellent  Maieflie." 
has  the  following. 

But  he  that  some  fortie  or  fifty  ye.ares  sithens,  should  haue  asked  after  a 
Pickadilly,  I  wonder  who  could  haue  vndcrstood  him,  or  could  haue  told 
what  a  Pickadilly  had  beene,  either  fish  or  flesh. 

But  amongst  the  trades  that  are  newly  taken  vp,  this  trade  of  Tobacco 
doth  e.xceede  :  and  the  money  that  is  spent  in  smoake  is  vnknowne,  and  (I 
thinke  vnthought  on,  and  of  such  a  smoake  as  is  more  vaine,  then  the  smoake 
of  fayre  words,  for  that  they  say)  will  serue  to  feede  Fooles,  but  this  smoake 
maketh  Fooles  of  Wisojicn :  mee  thinks  experience  were  enough  to  teach 
the  most  simple  witted,  that  before  Tobacco  was  euer  knowne  in  England^ 
that  we  liued  in  as  perfect  health,  and  as  free  from  sicknesse,  as  we  haue 
done  sithens,  and  looke  vppon  those  (whereof  there  are  a  number  at  this 

F)resent  houre  that  did  neuer  take  Tobacco  in  their  hues,  and  if  they  doe  not 
iue  as  healthsome  in  bodie,  and  as  free  from  all  manner  of  diseases,  as  those 
that  doe  take  it  fastest :  they  say  it  is  good  for  a  Cold,  for  a  Pose,  for  Rewtns, 
for  Aches,  for  Dropsies,  and  for  all  manner  of  diseases  proceeding  of  moyst 
humours  :  but  I  cannot  sec  but  that  those  that  doe  take  it  fastest,  areasmuch 
(or  more)  subiect  to  all  these  infirmities,  yea  and  to  the  poxe  it  selfe)  as  those 
that  haue  nothing  at  all  to  doe  with  it :  then  what  a  wonderfull  expence  might 
ver>'  well  bee  spared,  that  is  spent  and  consumed  in  this  needlesse  vanitie. 

There  is  not  so  base  a  groome,  that  commes  into  an  Alehouse  to  call  for  his 
pot,  but  ho  must  haue  his  pipe  of  Tobacco,  for  it  is  a  commoditie  that  is  nowe 
as  vendible  in  euery  'I'auerne,  Inne,  and  Ale  house,  as  eyther  Wine,  Ale,  or 
Beare,  and  for  Apothicaries  Shops,  Grosers  Shops,  Chaimdlers  Shops,  they 
are  -almost)  neuer  without  company,  that  from  morning  till  night  are  still 
taking  of  Tobacco,  what  a  number  are  there  besides,  that  doe  keepe  houses, 
set  open  shoppes,  that  haue  no  other  trade  to  liue  by,  but  by  the  selling  of 
Tobacco. 

I  haue  heard  it  tolde  that  now  very  lately,  there  hath  bin  a  Cathalogne 
taken  of  all  those  new  erected  houses  that  haue  set  vppe  that  Trade  of  sell- 
ing Tobacco,  in  London  and  neare  about  London  :  and  if  a  man  may  beleeue 
what  is  confidently  reported,  there  are  found  to  be  vpward  of  7000.  houses, 
that  doth  liue  by  that  trade. 

I  cannot  say  whether  they  number  Apothicaries  shoppes,  Grosers  shops, 
and  Chaundlers  shops  in  this  computation,  but  let  it  be  that  these  were  thrust 
in  to  make  vppe  the  number  :  let  vs  now  looke  a  little  into  the  Vidiiinis  of 
the  matter,  and  let  vs  cast  vppe  but  a  sleight  account,  what  the  expence 
might  be  that  is  consumed  in  this  smoakie  vapours. 

If  it  be  true  that  there  be  7000.  shops,  in  and  about  London,  that  doth  vent 
Tobacco,  as  it  is  credibly  reported  that  there  be  ouer  and  aboue  that  numbir; 
it  may  well  bee  supposed,  to  be  but  an  ill  customed  shoppe,  that  taketh  not 
fiue  shillings  a  day,  one  day  with  another,  throughout  the  whole  yeare,  or  if 
one  doth  take  lesse,  two  other  may  take  more :  but  let  vs  make  our  account, 
but  after  2  shillings  sixe  pence  a  day,  for  he  that  taketh  lesse  than  that, 
would  be  ill  able  to  p-^y  his  rent,  or  to  keepe  open  his  Shop  Windowes,  neither 


ii8      On  the  Early  Use  of  Tobacco  in  England. 

would  Tobacco  houses  make  such  a  muster  as  they  doe,  and  that  almost  in 
euery  Lane,  and  in  euery  by-corner  round  about  Lo7idou. 

Let  vsthen  reckon  thus,  7000.  halfe  Crowns  a  day,  amounteth  just  to  319,375 
poundes  a  yeare.     Siciuvta  totalis,  All  spent  in  sinoake. 

I  doe  not  reckon  now  what  is  spent  in  Tauernes,  in  Innes,  in  Alehouses, 
nor  what  gentlemen  doe  spend  in  their  ovvne  houses  and  chambers,  it  would 
amount  to  a  great  reckoning,  but  if  I  cou'de  deliuer  truly  what  is  spent 
throughout  the  whole  Realme  of  England,  in  that  idle  vanitie,  I  thinke  it 
woulde  make  a  munber  of  good  people  (that  haue  anle  feare  of  God  in  them) 
to  lament,  that  such  a  masse  of  Treasure,  should  be  so  basely  consumed, 
that  might  be  imployed  to  many  better  purposes. — ■//.  25-27. 

(3.)  Joshua  Sylvester,  the  ti-anflator  of  Du  Bartas,  wrote  a 
poem,  under  the  title  of  Tobacco  battened;  and  the  Pipes  JJiattered 
[About  their  Eares  that  idlcly  Idolize fo  bafe  and  barbarous  a  Weed ; 
or  at  least-zuife  ouer-loue  fo  loathfonie  Vanitie:)  by  A  Volley  of  holy 
Shot  thundered  from  Mount  Helicon.  The  cahbre  of  this  Invec- 
tive may  be  meafured  by  its  concktding  lines — 

How  iuster  will  the  Heau'nly  GoD, 

Th'  FAernal,  punish  with  infernal  Rod, 

In  Hell's  darke  (Fornace,  with  black  Fjimes,  to  choak) 

Those,  that  on  Earth  will  still  offend  in  Siitoak  ? 

Offend  their  Friends,  with  a  Most  vn-Respect : 

Offend  their  Wiues  and  Children,  with  Neglect: 

Offend  the  Eyes,  with  foule  and  loathsom  Spawlings : 

Offend  the  Nose,  with  filthy  Fumes  exhalings  : 

Offend  the  Eares,  with  lowd  lewd  Execrations : 

Offend  the  Mouth,  with  ougly  Excreations: 

Offend  the  Sense,  with  stupefying  Sense : 

Offend  the  Weake,  to  follow  their  Offoise  : 

Offend  the  Body,  and  offend  the  Minde  : 

Offend  the  Conscience  in  a  fearefull  kinde  : 

Offend  their  Baptisme,  and  their  Seco7id  Birth  '. 

Offend  the  Maiestie  of  Heau'n  and  Earth. 

Woe  to  the  World  because  of  Such  Offenses  ; 

So  voluntaire,  so  voyd  of  all  pretenses 

Of  all  Excuse  (saue  Fashion,  Ciistome,  Will) 

In  so  apparant,  proued,  granted,  ///. 

Woe,  woe  to  them  by  Whom  Offences  come, 

So  scandalous  to  All  our  Christendome. 
1815.  An  Advice  hovv  to  plant  Tobacco  in  England :  and  kow  to 
bring  it  to  colour  and  perfection,  to  whom  it  may  be  profitable,  and 
to  lohom  harmfull.  I  he  vertices  of  the  Hearbe  in  generally  as 

well  in  the  outward  application  as  taken  in  FvME.  With  the 
dan<^er  of  the  Spanifli  Tobacco.     Written  by  C.  T. 

This  work  gives  us  a  good  idea  of  the  rapid  growth  of  To- 
bacco Smoking  in  England. 

I  haue  heard  it  reported,  by  men  of  good  iudgement,  that  there  is  paid  out 
of  England  and  Ireland,  neere  the  value  of  two  hundred  thousand  pounds 
euery  yeare  for  Tobacco ;  and  that  the  greatest  part  thereof  is  bought  for 
ready  money.  Sure  I  am,  that  when  our  Englishmen  for  these  seuen  or  eight 
yeares  last  past,  traded  for  it  at  Trinidado,  or  in  Orenoqiie,  that  great  store 
of  Gold,  Siluer,  Coine,  and  plate  was  carried  hence,  and  giuen  to  the  Spaniard 
there  in  exchange.  For  so  greedy  were  our  English  of  the  Indian  Tobacco, 
as  where  in  the  beginning  of  our  trafiique  there,  some  yeares  since,  the 
Spaniards  (as  in  all  new  plantations)  were  prest  with  all  sorts  of  wants  ;  and 
had  neither  cloathes  to  couer  them,  nor  shooes  to  tread  on,  nor  bread  to 
eate,  and  did  therefore  exchange  their  Tobacco  for  Fish,  Wine,  Aqua-vitae, 
all  sorts  of  lasting  food,  for  woollen  stockins,  hats,  threed,  hatchets,  and  the 
like :  they  became  in  a  short  time  so  cloyd  with  all  these  commodities,  ac. 


On  the  Early  Use  of  Tobacco  in  England.      119 

nothing  (some  Silkes.  and  Cloath  of  Siluer  and  Gold  excepted)  but  ready 
Money,  and  Siluer  plate  could  content  them. 

This  Trade  therefore,  where  the  Treasure  of  this  land  is  vented  for  smoke, 
cannot  but  ecreatly  prciudice  the  Coinmon-weale  :  which  although  it  were  in 
some  sort  tollerable,  by  reason  that  many.shippes  and  ^L~lriners  were  employed, 
and  that  thereby  wee  kept  our  knowledge  of  the  West  Indies,  and  bred  many 
sufficient  Marriuers  :  yet  seeing  the  Spaniards  haue  now  vtterly  banished  our 
Merchants,  and  put  all  to  the  sword,  or  to  a  more  cruell  death,  which  they 
can  maister,  or  betray  in  those  parts  :  I  haue  thought  good,  as  well  for  the 
keeping  within  the  Land  of  the  Treasure  before  spoken  of,  then  carried  into 
the  Indies,  and  now  into  Spaine,  as  for  other  respects  hereafter  remembred; 
to  instruct  those  of  our  Nation  how  to  sow,  plant  and  perfect  this  drugge. 

For  besides  the  ill  exchange  made  for  this  fantasticall  merchandize,  and 
besides,  the  e.vtreame  rate,  and  price  of  the  Indian  Tobacco,  of  which  the 
greatest  part  is  sold  for  ten  times  the  value  of  pepper,  and  the  best  of  it, 
weii^ht  for  weight,  for  the  finest  siluer;  it  is  hard  to  find  one  pound  weight 
in  hue  hundred,  that  is  not  sophisticate. 

The  naturall  colour  of  Tobacco  is  a  deepe  yellow,  or  a  light  tawnie  :  and 
when  the  Indians  themselues  sold  it  vs  for  Kniues,  Hatchets,  Beads,  Belles, 
and  like  merchandise,  it  had  no  other  complexion,  as  all  the  Tobacco  at  this 
day  hath,  which  is  brought  from  the  coast  of  Guiana,  from  Saint  Vhicents, 
from  Saint  Lucia,  from  Dominica,  and  other  places,  where  we  buy  it  but  of 
the  naturall  people,  and  all  these  sorts  are  cleane,  and  so  is  that  of  St.  Do- 
mingo, where  the  Spaniards  haue  not  yet  learned  the  Art  of  Sophistication. 

There  is  also  a  sort  of  Caraccas  Tobacco,  which  the  Indians  make  vp,  and 
sell  to  the  Spaniards,  which  is  wholesome  enough;  but  there  comes  little  of 
it  into  England. 

Now  besides  these  harmefull  mixtures,  if  our  English  which  delight  in 
Indian  Tobacco,  had  scene  how  the  Spanish  slaues  make  it  vp,  how  they  dresse 
their  sores,  and  pockie  vlcers,  with  the  same  vnwasht  hands  with  which  they 
slubber  and  annoynt  the  Tobacco,  and  call  it  sauce  Per  los  perros  Lutera7ios, 
for  Lutheran  dogges,  they  would  not  so  often  draw  it  into  their  heads  and 
through  their  noses  as  they  doe  :  yea  many  a  filthy  sauour  should  they  find 
therem,  did  not  the  smell  of  the  hiuiny  maister  it,  which  smell  euery  man 
may  plainly  perceiue  that  takes  of  the  blacke  role  Tabacco,  brought  from 
Orenoque,  Triyiidado,  and  else-where. 

1616.  John  Deacon — who  appears  to  have  been  another 
Phillip  Stubbes — dedicated  Tobacco  tortured ;  or  the  filthie  fume 
of  Tobacco  refined',  to  James  I. 

This  work  is  in  the  form  of  a  dialogue  between  Capjiifius  and 
Hydrophonis.  It  is  divided  into  two  parts:  (i.)  The  Fume  of 
Tobacco  taken  inward,  is  very  pernicious  vnto  the  Body,  (2.) 
The  P'ume  of  Tobacco  taken  inward,  is  too  too  profluuious  for 
many  of  our  Tobacconists  purfes,  and  moft  pernicious  to  the 
pul)like  State. 

The  following  extracls  will  fhow  the  nature  of  the  work. 

Capn.  Alas  poore  Tobacco,  mypretie  Tobacco;  thou  that  hast  bene  hitherto 
accompted  the  Ale-knights  amies,  the  Eccre-brewers  badge,  the  Carousers 
crest,  the  Drunkards  darling,  the  Drafl'e-sacks  delight,  the  Easterlingsensigne, 
the  Fantasticals  foretresse,  the  Gormandizers  glorie,  the  hungry  Hostesses  ale- 
pole,  the  Mad-braines  merriment,  the  New-fangles  noueltie,  the  Poope-noddies 
paramour,  the  Ruffians  reflection,  the  Swil-bols  swine-troffe,  the  linkers 
trull,  the  Tospots  protection,  the  Vintners  vintage,  and  the  vnthriftspa^port : 
thou  must  now  (I  feare  me  bee  enforced  forthwith  to  take  thy  farewell  to- 
wards the  vtterinost  parts  of  htdia,  from  whence  thou  wert  first  transported 
to  England  by  vicious  and  wild  dispositions A  57- 

Hydr.  First  therefore  for  the  exceeding  high  rate  that  this  Tobacco  hath 
euer  bene  at  since  the  very  first  arriuall  thereof  into  England,  thou  thy  selfe, 
and  all  our  Tobacco7iists,  are  able  to  say  this  of  your  owr.e  proper  knowledge : 


I20     On  the  Early  Use  of  Tobacco  in  England. 

namely,  that  the  same  hath  vsually  bene  sold  by  the  pound,  for  twentle 
nobles,  fine,  foure,  or  three  pounds :  yea  and  when  it  came  to  the  lowest 
price,  it  could  not  bee  had  vnder  foure  markes  or  fortie  shillings,  which 
amounteth  to  three  shillings  four  pence  an  ounce  at  the  least.  Is  not  this 
(thinkest  thou)  an  exceeding  high  rate  for  filthie  Tobacco'?  .   .   .    p.  6i. 

Hydr.  Concerning  therefore  that  former  superfluous  and  riotous  waste,  which 
those  Tobacconists  do  so  wilfully  make  about  their  beastly  Tobacco  fumes, 
do  tell  me  in  good  sadnesse,  whether  it  be  not  a  superfluous  waste,  for  any 
man  of  great  place,  to  paddle  forth  yearely  one  hundred  pounds  at  the  least, 
for  an  hundred  gallons  of  filthyy^^w^j?  for  a  Gentleman  of  meaner  condition, 
to  be  at  fortie  pound  annuall  expences,  about  bare  fortie  pottels  of  stinking 
flames?  for  a  Yeoman,  an  Husbandman,  an  Artificer,  al"rades-man,  a  Tinker, 
a  Shoomaker,  or  a  Cobbler,  to  bestow  weekely  some  three  shillings  four- 
pence  at  the  least,  for  but  one  onely  ounce  of  fantastical  fooleries?  .   .  .  p.  62. 

Hydr.  So  as  (by  these  meanes)  they  make  great  noble  Persons,  but  single- 
soaled  Gentlemen  ;  well  bred  Gentelmen,  but  bare  thredded  Yeomen  ;  bounti- 
fuU  Yeomen,  but  beggerly  Husbandmen,  hospitious  Husbandmen,  but  shifting 
Trades-men,  artificious  Trades-men  but  conicatching  companions ,  conicatch- 
ing  companions,  but  vagabond  rogues.  Thus  thou  mayest  plainly  perceiue 
how  these  their  intoxicating  Tobacco  fjimes  are  able  (in  an  vnpeiceiuable  and 
Circean  manner)  to  transforme  nobilitie  into  gentrie,  gentrie  into  yeomanrie, 
yeomanrie  into  husbandry,  husbandrie  into  maunuarie,  manuarie  into  manu- 
biarie,  manubiarle  into  a  vagrant  and  retchlesse  roguerie,  and  what  not 
besides?    /.  65. 

(2.)  The  Coiinterblaste  was  reprinted  this  year  in  Bishop 
Montagu's  edition  of  James'  Workes. 

1619.  Bishop  Montagu  publifhed  a  Latin  tranflation  of  the 
King's  works  :  in  which  the  Cotmterblajie  appears  as  Mifocapnus^ 
feu  de  Abiifit  Tobacci.     This  provoked  a  Polish  Jefuit  to  write- 
Antimifocapmis,  a  tracft  which  I  have  not  met  with. 

We  cannot  better  conclude  thefe  fcattered  notices,  than  with 
the  following  poem  :  sometimes  called  Tobauo  Spiritualized :  but 
which  is  evidently  reprinted  in  Two  Broadfides^  iS^c.  1672  :  see 
No.  4,  p.  6. 

The  htdian  Weed  withered  quite, 

Green  at  Noon,  cut  down  at  Night; 

Shews  thy  decay,  all  Flesh  is  hay : 

Thus  think,  then  drink  Tobacco. 

The  Pipe  that  is  so  lilly-white, 
Shews  Thee  to  be  a  mortal  Wight, 
And  euen  such  gone  with  a  touch  : 
Thus  think,  then  drink  Tobacco. 

And  when  the  Smoke  ascends  on  high, 
Think  thou  behold'st  the  Vanity 
Of  worldly  stuff,  gone  with  a  puff: 
Thus  think,  then  drink  Tobacco. 

And  when  the  Pipe  grows  foul  within^ 
Think  on  the  Soul  defil'd  with  Sin, 
And  then  the  Fire  it  doth  require  : 
Thus  think,  then  drink  Tobacco. 

The  Ashes  that  are  left  behind 
May  serve  to  put  tliee  still  in  mind. 
That  unto  Dust  return  thou  must: 
Thus  think,  then  drink  Tobacco. 

Answered  by  Geor:ie  Withers  thus. 

Thus  think,  drink  no  Tobacco. 


Mtdr  &'  Paterso7i,  Printers,  Edinburgh, 


^UQli^f^  ^t^xint^. 


Sir    ROBERT    NAUNTON 

Master  of  the  Court  of  Wards. 


i' ragmenta    I\egalia, 


Probably  written  about  1630. 


Reprinted  from  the  Third  Posthumous  Edition  of  1653, 

PY 

KDWAHD    ARHKR, 

Affociate,  King's  College,  London,  F.R.G.S.,  &*c. 


'f 


LONDON : 

;  QUKF.N   SQUAKI.,    i;l  ,<  )' )MSIU  I' V,  \V  < ' 

Ent.  Sint.  Hall.]  I  October,   187O.  [All  Rights  re/erved 


CONTENTS, 


Contents  .  .  . 

Notices  of  Sir  Robert  Naunton  , 

Introduction 

Bibliography        .  .  • 


PAGE 
2 

5 

7 

lo 


II 


14 


FR A  OMENTA  REGALIA 


I.   Queen  di^abetl). 

Titles.  Creations. 

Sir  Geoffrey  Boleyne       .  .  _  . 

Lord  Mayor  of  London  in  1458,  in  which  year  he  was  knighted. 

^'iV  William  Boleyne,  K.B.,  ^.  10  Oct.  1505       .  .  .  .14 

6'/r  Thomas  Boleyne,  18  June  1525  ?^z>f(72^/2/ RocHFORD  .  .     14 

8  Dec.  1529  1^^''^  ^/Wiltshire  in  England. 
^  ^  (  Earl  qfO-RUOUT)  in  Ireland. 
He  had  two  daughters  : 
Anne  Boleyne,  created  i  Sept.    1532  Marchioness  ^Pembroke         14,15 
who  became  by  marriage  on  25  Jan.  1533,  Queen  Consort  of  England. 
[The  mother  of  ELIZABETH.] 

Mary  Boleyne,  who  married  William  Carey,  Esq.  .  .  •14 

[The  mother  oi  Sir  Henry  Carey,  Zt?r^  Hunsdon.] 


II.  W^t  ^eroatttjs;  of  \)tx  ^tate  anb  /at)our. 

Noblemen  of  an  earlier  date  alluded  to  are  inserted  between  [  ]. 
Title.  Subsequent  Creations  as  Peers. 

1554.  Henry  Fitz-Allan,   12th  ^«r/ ^Arundel,   d.  1580.     . 


Sir  Francis  Bacon, 
ZSir  Nicholas  Bacon 


II  July  1618.  BaroH  Verulam,  of  Verulam. 
28  Jan.  1621.  Viscoitni  St.  Albans,   d.  1626. 


46 

38 
38 


C  O  X  TE  N  TS.  3 

1563.  Thomas,  5th  Baron  Burgh  or  Borough,    d.  14  Oct.  1597  .     53 

[>535-  Charles  Blount,  5th  Baron  Mountjoy,  of  Thun-eston.    d. 

14  Oct  1544]    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .56 

1544.  James  Blount,  6th  Baron  Mountjov,  of  Thurveston.     d.  1593     56 

1593.  Wm.  Blount,  7th  ^rtr^iM  Mountjoy,  of  Thurveston.     </.  1594     .     57 

A/ 1594.    Charles  Blount,  21  July  1603.    JF^r/ ^  Devonshire 

8ih  and  last  Baron  Mount-        d.  3  April  1606  19,  52,  57,  58,  61 

JOY,  of  Thurveston 

Sir  Henry  Carey      13  Jan.  1559.     Baron  Hundson.    d.  1596  17,  46,  47 

7" Sir  William  Cecil     25   Feb.    1571.     Baron  of  Burghley.    d. 

1598       •  .  •  .  •  30.  31 

Sir  Thomas  Cecil        1598.    Baron  of  Burghley 

4  May  1605.     EarlofY.y.'e.fEM.     d.  1622        .     59 

TS\t  Robert  Cecil        13  May  1603.     Baron  Cecil  of  Essendon. 
20  Aug.  1604.     Viscojini  Cranrourne. 
4  May  1605.     Earl  of  Sa'LISZVRw     </.  1612.  5962 

1576.  Robert  Devereux,  2nd  £'^r/<7/"  Essex  .  .     51-55,56 

[Edmonde  Dudley,  Esqre.    d.  17  Aug.  15 10].  .  .  .  26,  27 

Walter  Devereux.     2nd  Viscount  Hereford 

4  Ivlay  1572  j^rtr/t?/ Essex.     </.  1576.  .  .     29 

[John  Dudley.  12  Mar.  1542.     Viscount  LTsle 

17  Feb.  1547.     Earl  of  Warwick. 
1551.  Duke  of  Northumberland,    d.  1553. 1     27 

Sir  Ambrose  Dudley    25  Dec.  1561.     Baron  L'Tsle. 

26  Dec.  1561.     Ear/ of  Warwick.     ^.1589.     28 

Sir  Robert  Dudley.      28  Sept.  1563.    Baron  Denbigh 

28  Sept.  1565.     Eai-1  of  Leicester,     d.  1588. 

17,  26-29,  30 

Sir  Francis  Englefield  .  .  .  .  .  .25 

1562.  Arthur  Grey,  15th  Baron  Grey,  of  Wilton,    d.  1593  .  .    48 

T'Sir  Fulke  Greville      29  Jan.    1621.     Baron  Brooke  of  Beau- 
champs  Court,     d.  1628.        50.  52 

7" Sir  Christopher  Hatto.m  .  .  .  .  .  •     44 

Sir  William  Herbert  id  Oct.  1511.     Baron  Herbert  of  Cardiff 

11  Oct.  1551.    jPar/tT/PEMBROKE.  d.  1569.  13-^4 

.^/i56i.  Sir  Owen  Hopton  .  .  .  .  .  .42 

Mi^Ti-  Lord  Charles  Howard,  22  Oct.  1596   ^'ar/*?/' Nottingham. 

2nd  Baron  Howard  of  Effing-    d.  1624       .  .  .  •45 

ham 

1597.    .S'/r  Thomas  Howard.      21  July  1603.    .£ar/ ^Suffolk. 

DE  Walden     .  .  .        d.  1624    .  .  .  .46 

ZSir  William  Knollys    13  May  1603.  Baron  Knollys  of  Greys 

7  Nov.  1C16.  Viscount  WallingfORD. 

18  Aug.  1626.  Eari  of  Baubvrv.     d. 

1632. 39 


4  CONTENTS. 

M  Sir  Henry  Norreys      8  May  1572.     Baron  Norreys  of  Rycote. 

d.  1600   .  .  .  .  -39 

M  Sir  Francis  Norreys     1600.     2d  Baron  Norreys  Rycote 
28  Jan.  1620.      Viscount  Thame. 
20  Jan.  1620.     .£'«r/ ^Berkshire,     d. 
1623. 

General  Sir  John  Norris  .  .  .  .  .  .39 

vS"z>  John  Packington      .  .  .  .  .  .  .46 

7"  Sir  William  Paulet         9  Mar.  1539.     Baron  Saint  John 
19  Jan,  1550.     f'rtr/ ^Wiltshire. 
12  Oct.  1551.     Marqttis  ofWiNCHKS- 
TER.     d.  10  Mar.  1572.       .  .  .25 

7^f  ^^iV  John  Perrot            ......  4i-44 

Sir  Thomas  Perrot         .           .           .           .           .           .  -43 

M 1584.     Sir  Walter  Raleigh      .....  47-5° 

jT/ 1556.     Thomas  Ratcliffe,  3rd  £'«r/^  Sussex.    </.  1583.  .  17,29,30 

7^1556.    Sir  Thomas  Sackville.    8  June  1567.    Baron  o/BucviiiVRST 

13  Mar.  1603.   Earl  q/  Dorset,   d.  1608.  17,  55,  56 

T  Sir  Henry  Sidney  ....  .  .  ,     34 

Edward  Seymour.     13  Jan.  1559.     Baron  Beauchamp  of  Hache 

and  jS'rt:r/^  Hertford,     a?.  1621.         .  .     26 

iJ/ 1583.     ^2>  Philip  Sidney           .....  33-35 

7"  1589.     Edward  Somerset,  4th  £■«;-/ (?/"  Worcester.     1628.  .     63 

7'  1583.     Sir  Edward  Stafford    .            .            .            .            .  .63 

M 1588.     Sir  Francis  Vere           .            .            .           .            ,  62,  63 

i?l/ 1596.  SirHoRACE  Vere  24  July  1625.   Baron  Vere  of  Tilbury.  ^.1635  63 

TxS77-     Sir  Francis  Walsingham           ....  35-57 

7"  1554.    John,  5«ri3«  Williams,  of  Thame        .           .           .  -39 

M  Baron  Willoughby         .            .            .            .            .            .  .47 

III.   ^ome  ot!)er  Per^onie;  alltitieti  to. 

Bow\'ER,  a  gentleman  of  the  Black  Rod  .  .  .  .  •     17 

Cawarden,  an  officer  of  the  Customs  .  .  .  .  .22 

CuFFE,  Secretary  to  the  Earl  of  Essex  .  .  .  .  -55 

Sir  Henry  Wotton               .            .  .  .  .  •  Si,  55 

.  *  .  The  dates  preceding  the  names  are  those  of  succession  to  or  creation 
of  the  several  titles.  For  further  pursuit  of  this  subject,  consult  Sylvanus 
Morgan's  Sphere  of  Gentry,  1660,  J.  Philpot,  the  Somerset  Herald's  Col- 
lection 0/  Knights,  1660,  Burke's  Dormant  Peerage,  and  Nicolas'  His- 
toric Peerage,  Ed.  by  Courthope,  1857. 


Notices  of  Sir  Robert  Naunton. 

1.  John  Weever, acontemporary,inhis^;/r/V;///v^w^/'^// J/^//- 
uments^  &'c.,  defcribing  thofe  in  'the  Dioceffe  of  Norwich'  dates, 

In  the  Priorie  Church  here  at  Letheringham,  diners  of  the  ancient  famiUe  of 
the  Nantons  lie  buried.  Of  whom  out  of  their  pedegree,  I  haue  these  notes 
following.  Master  William  Smart  affirmeth  that  he  hath  scene  an  ancient 
Euidence,  dated  before  the  Conquest  of  England,  wherein  the  Nantons  are 
named,  who  saith  they  were  written  by  the  name  of  Na^vnton.  Roger  A  wston 
reporteth  that  Xazvnton  came  in  with  the  Conqueror,  and  that  he  hath  scene 
Records  of  the  same,  who  for  scruice  done  had  then  giuen  him  in  marriage  a 
great  inheritrix.  It  is  reported  that  Nazvntons  lands  were  at  that  time  700 
markes,  />er  annnfn.  These  A'niinions  TirQ  Patrons  of  the  Church  of  Alderton 
in  this  County,  as  appeares  by  this  Epitaph  there. 

Here  \\q\.\\  Henry  A'aun  ton  Esquire,  late  Patron  of  this  Church,  and  Tristram 
Naunton,  both  ^onnes  of  IVilliani  Naunton  Esquire, and  oi Elisabethhxs  wife; 
and  Elisabeth  wife  to  the  said  /^^'wry,  daughter  oi  Euerard  Ashcby  Esquire, 
and  Elisabeth  A-wx^w.tx  to  the  said  Henry  Naunton,  and  Elisabeth  Asheby. 
Fatruus  ignotus,  Genetrix  vix  not  a,  sororqiie 

Occumbunt  scqueris  tu  in:hi  sancte  Pater.  Th'' "  likewU* 

C/uira  Domus  terras /ugitis  neque  sic  inefugitis       church  he°T at 

Vos  SCquar  in  CCelos LetheriDgUam. 

Patri,  Patmo,  Matri,  SorortilcB  charissintis 
Posui,JJeuique  Roberttts  Naunton.  t6oo. 

Now  Sir  Robert  Naunton  knight,  one  of  his  Maiestics  most  Honourable 
priuie  Councell,  and  master  of  the  Court  of  Wardes  and  Liueries.  Of  which 
Office,  will  it  please  readc  thus  much  out  of  the  Interpreter,  as  followeth. 

Master  of  the  Court  of  Wards  and  Liueries,  sailh  he  [/?.  Cowell  lit.  M.]  is 
the  chiefe  and  principall  officer  of  the  Court  of  Wards  and  Liueries,  named 
and  as.signed  by  the  King,  to  whose  custody  the  Scale  of  Court  is  committed. 
He  at  the  entring  vpon  his  Office,  taketh  an  Oath  before  the  Lord  Chancel- 
lour  of  England,  well  and  truly  to  serue  the  king  in  his  Office,  to  minister 
equall  lustice  to  rich  and  to  poore,  to  the  best  of  his  cunning,  wit,  and  power, 
diligently  to  procure  all  things  which  may  honestly  and  iustly  be  to  the  kings 
aduantage  and  profit,  and  to  the  augmentation  of  the  right  and  prerogatiue 
of  the  Crowne,  truly  to  vse  the  Kings  Scale  appointed  to  his  office,  to  en- 
deuour  to  the  vttermost  of  his  power,  to  see  the  King  iustly  answered  of  all 
such  profits,  rents,  reuenucs,  and  issues,  as  shall  yearely  rise,  grow,  or  be  due 
to  the  King  in  his  office,  from  time  to  time,  to  deliuer  with  speed  such  as  haue 
to  doe  before  him,  not  to  take  or  rcceiue  of  any  person  any  gift  or  reward  in 
any  case  or  matter  depending  before  him,  or  wherein  the  King  shall  be  partie, 
whereby  any  preiudice,  losse,  hinderance,  or  disherison  shall  be,  or  grow  to 
the  king.     Ann.  33.  Hen.  8.  cap.  33.     Weever, //.  756-7.     London.     1631. 

2.  The  Rev.  T.  Fuller,  D.D.,  in  The  Worthies  of  England, 
Part  iv.  p.  64,  Ed.  1662  :  among  the  Worthies  of  Suffolk,  gives 
the  following  account  of  the  prefent  Writer. 

Sir  Robert  Naunton,  was  born  in  this  County,  of  Right  ancient  Extrac- 
tion, some  avouching  that  his  Family  were  here  before,  others  that  they  came 
in  with  the  Conqiieror,  who  rewarded  the  chief  of  that  Nai7ie  for  his  service 
with  a  great  Inheretrix  given  him  in  marriage.  In  so  much  that  his  Lands 
were  then  estimated  at  (a  vast  sum  in  my  ludgment)  seven  hundred  poimds 
[Fuller  quotes  Weever  as  above,  for  this]  a  year.  For  a  long  time  they  were 
Patrons  oi  Alderton  in  this  County,  where  I  conceive  Sir  Robert  was  born. 

He  was  first  bred  Fellow  Commoner  in  Trinity  Colledgc,  and  then  Fellow 
of  Trinity-Hall  in  Cambridge.  He  was  Proctor  of  the  Vniversity,  Anno 
Domini  1601,  which  Office  according  to  the  Old  Circle  returned  not  to  that 
Colledgc  but  once  in  fourty  four  years.  He  addicted  himself  from  his  youth 
to  such  studies,  as  did  tend  to  accomplish  him  for  Publick  iviployment.  I 
conceive  his  most  excellent  piece  called  Fragmenta  Regalia,  set  forth  since 
his  death,  was  z fruit  oi  h\s  younger  years.     [This  is  a  mistake,  see/.  7.] 

He  was  afterwards  sworn  Secretary  of  State  to  King  James  on  Thursday 
the  eighth  of  January,  1617,  which  place  he  discharged  with  great  ability  and 
dexterity,  and  I  hope  it  will  be  no  offence  here  to  insert  a  pleasant  passage. 

One  Air.  IViemark  a  wealthy  man,  great  Novilant,  and  constant  Pauls 
walker,  hearing  the  News  that  day  of  the  beheading  of  Sir  Walter  Raleigh : 


6  Notices  of  Sir  Robert  Naunton. 

His  head  (said  he)  would  do  very  well  on  the  shoulders  of  Sir  Robert 
Naunton,  Secretary  of  State.  These  words  were  complained  of,  and  Wie- 
mark  summoned  to  the  Privy  Councel,  where  he  pleaded  for  himself,  that 
he  intended  no  dis-respect  to  Mr.  Secretary,  whose  known  Worth  was  abo\e 
all  detraction  ;  Only  he  spake  in  reference  to  an  old  Proverb,  Two  heads  are 
better  than  one.  And  so  for  the  present  he  was  dismissed.  Not  long  after, 
when  rich  men  were  called  on  for  a  Co7itribiUion  to  St.  Parels,  VViemark  at 
the  Councel-Table  subscribed  a  hundred  pounds,  but  Mr.  Secretary  told 
him  two  hundred  were  better  than  one,  which  betwixt  fear  and  charity 
Wiemark  was  fain  to  subscribe. 

He  died  Anno  Domini  163  .  .  leaving  one  daughter,  who  first  was  married 
to  Paid  Vicount  Banning,  and  af  :er  to  the  Lord  Herbert,  eldest  son  to 
Philip  Earl  of  Pembroke. 

3.  Rev.  T.  Birch,  D.D,,  in  his  Memoirs  of  Qtteen  Elizabeth, 
i.  369-370,  Ed.  1754,  thus  writes  : — 

Mr.  Natinton,  who  carried  this  letter  to  France,  and  whom  the  earl  [of  Es- 
sex] stiles  in  it  \v\?,friejtd,  was  descended  from  an  antient  family  in  Suffolk,  and 
educated  a  fellow-commoner  of  Trinity  College  in  Cambridge,  and  afterwards 
chosen  a  fellow  of  Trinity  Hall.  When  his  uncle  IVilliam  AsJtby,  esq., 
was  sent  embassador  from  queen  Elizabeth  into  Scotland  in  the  year  1589, 
he  attended  him  thither,  probably  in  the  office  of  secretary,  and  was  some- 
times sent  by  him  on  affairs  of  trust  and  importance  to  the  court  of  England, 
where  he  was  in  July  that  year,  discontented  with  his  unsuccessful  depen 
dance  on  courtiers,  and  resolv'd  to  hasten  back  to  his  uncle,  to  whom  he 
return'd  in  the  beginning  of  the  month  following,  and  continued  with  him 
till  January  1590,  when  Mr.  Ashby  was  revok'd  from  his  embassy,  in  which  he 
was  succeeded  "hy  Robert  Bowes,  esq.  Mr.  Naunton  was  in  France  during  the 
years  1596  and  1597,  whence  he  corresponded  frequently  with  the  earl  of  Es- 
sex, who  does  not  appear  to  have  had  interest  enough  to  advance  him  to  any 
civil  post;  for  which  reason  it  is  probable,  that,  after  his  lordship's  disgrace, 
Mr.  Naunton  retired  to  his  college,  and  was  in  1601  elected  orator  of  the 
university  of  Cambridge.  However  he  was  afterwards  call'd  forth  again 
into  the  world,  being  made  first  a  master  of  the  requests,  then  surveyor  of 
the  court  of  wards,  and  in  January  1617-8,  secretary  of  state,  and  at  last  master 
of  the  court  of  wards,  which  post  he  resign'd  in  March  1634-5,  and  died  in  the 
same  month.  He  was  a  man  of  considerable  learning,  and  well  qualified  for 
political  affairs,  and  his  letters  contain  many  curious  facts  and  just  observa- 
tions on  the  characters  of  persons  and  parlies,  but  obscur'd,  as  well  as  his 
Fragmenta  regalia,  by  an  affectation  of  style  less  frequent  under  the  reign 
of  queen  Elizabeth,  than  her  immediate  successor. 

4.  Rev.  D.  Lloyd,  Canon  of  St.  Afaph,  in  a  work,  poffibly 
fuggefled  by  the  prefent  one,  entitled  The  States-men  and  Fa- 
vourites of  England  fine  e  the  Reformation,  London,  1665,  makes 
fome  obfervations  on  the  prefent  writer  ;  beginning  thus  : — 

Sir  Robert  Naunton  is  the  Author  of  one  Book  of  Observations  upon  the 
States-men  of  Queen  Eliz.  times,  and  must  be  the  subject  of  another  of 
king  James  his :  He  noted  then  in  his  youth,  what  he  was  to  practice  after- 
wards in  his  more  reduced  years.  His  University-studies  at  Trinity-Colledge, 
whereof  he  was  Commoner  ;  and  at  Trinity-Hall,  whereof  he  was  Fellow  ;  His 
Speeches  both  while  Proctor  and  Orator  of  Cambridge,  discovered  him  more 
inclined  to  publick  Accomplishments,  than  private  Studies  :  He  improved  the 
opportunity  of  the  speech  he  was  to  make  before  King  ya7Jies  at  Hinchinbrook 
so  well,  that  as  His  Majesty  was  highly  affected  with  his  Latine  and  Learning, 
so  he  exactly  observed  his  prudence  and  serviceablenesse ;  whereupon  he 
came  to  Court  as  Sir  Thomas  Overburies  Assistant  first,  and  then  as  Sir 
George  Villiers  friend,  who  promoted  him  to  be  Secretary  of  State,  Ja7i.  8 
1617.  as  his  Majesty  did  awhile  after  to  be  Mr.  of  the  Wards.  The  first  place 
whereof  he  discharged  with  as  much  ability  and  dexterity,  as  he  did  the 
second  with  integrity;  onely  he  was  observed  close-handed.     .     .    //.  569-70. 

5.  See  also  J .  Nichol's  7^//?.  ^  Zi?<r^//?£';-j-/;/;'c,  iii.  515.  Ed.  I600: 
and  J.  Caulfield's  Memoirs  of  Sir  R.  Naunton.     Ed.  1814. 


Fraginenta  Regalia. 


INTRODUCTION, 

His  *  Eflay '  is  an  A.  B.  C.  book  in  the 
Hiflory  of  Queen  Elizabeth's  Court  :  a 
Primer,  but  hardly  anything  more.  Naun- 
ton  lived  too  near  the  times  he  wrote  of, 
to  write  all  he  knew. 
I  cannot  fay,  I  have  finiflied  it ;  for  I  know  how  defedlive  and 
imperfect  it  is.  ...  I  took  it  into  confideration,  how  eafily  I 
might  have  dafht  in  too  much  of  the  ftain  of  pollution,  and 
thereby  have  defaced  that  little  that  is  done  :  For  I  profeffe,  I 
have  taken  care  fo  to  mafler  my  Pen,  that  I  might  not  {ex 
aninio,  or  of  fet  purpofe)  difcolour  truth,  or  any  of  the  parts  there- 
of, otherwife  than  in  concealment.  .  .  .  Modefly  in  me  forbids 
the  defacements  of  men  departed,  whofe  Poflerity  yet  remaining, 
enjoyes  the  merit  of  their  vertues,  and  doe  still  live  in  their 
Honour.  And  I  had  rather  incurre  the  cenfure  of  abruption, 
than  to  be  confcious,  and  taken  in  the  manner  of  eruption,  and 
of  trampling  upon  the  graves  of  Perfons  at  reft  ;  which  living, 
we  durft  not  look  in  the  face,  nor  make  our  addreffes  to  them, 
otherwife  than  with  due  regard  to  their  Honours,  and  renown 
to  their  Vertues.    /.  64. 

The  foftened  charadler  of  thefe  *  Courtly  Chips' 
being  taken  into  account :  Naunton  expreffes  therein  the 
flrongefl  poffible  cenfure  of  the  Earl  of  Leicefler.  No 
evil  thing  feems  to  him  to  be  of  too  hard  a  belief  con- 
cerning '  The  Gipfy'  :  and  there  is  a  thread  of  derifive 
difparagement  traceable  in  every  allufion  that  he 
makes  to  him. 

The  Sketch  is  brief,  very  clofely  written,  has  frequent 
obfcure  allufions,  and  is  confpicuous  for  its  perfe6l 
ab fence  of  dates.     If  it  was  all  written  at  one  time,  it 


8  Introduflioii. 

was  written  after  the  death  of  Edward  Somerfet,  Earl 
of  Worcefler,  in  1628. 

And  as  I  have  placed  him  lafl,  fo  was  he  the  lafl  liver  of  all  the 
Servants  of  her  favour,  and  had  the  honour  to  fee  his  renowned 
miflreffe,  and  all  of  them  laid  in  the  places  of  their  reft.    /.  63. 

Again,  it  was  written  while  Sir  William  Knollys  en- 
joyed the  title  of  the  only  Earl  of  Banbury  that  there 
has  been  [created  18  Aug.  1626 — d.  1632].  Internal 
evidence  would  therefore  feem  to  fix  the  date  of  its 
compofition  about  the  year  1630. 

Thefe  Obfervations — however  they  may  have  circul- 
ated in  MS.  during Naunton's  lifetime — were  not  printed 
until  fix  years  after  his  death,  which  occurred  on  Good 
Friday  1635.-^  Never  has  fuch  a  popular  work  received 
harder  ufage.  The  firfl  and  fecond  poflhumous  editions 
in  1 641  and  1642,  were  apparently  printed  without  any 
fupervifion.  It  is  hard  to  choofe  which  is  the  more 
corrupt  text :  or  in  which  there  is  a  larger  propor- 
tion of  jumbled  nonfenfe.  The  text  of  1653  feems 
to  have  had  more  care  fpent  upon  it,  and  has  there- 
fore been  chofen  for  the  prefent  Reprint.  The 
reader  will,  however,  in  perufing  it,  fometimes  wifh 
that  Naunton  were  by  to  explain  his  own  meaning. 

Of  this  '  little  Draught  of  this  great  Princefs,  and  her 
Times,  with  the  fervants  of  her  flate  and  favour,' 
written  by  a  whilome  Favourite  of  King  James ;  the 
following  may  be  noted  : 

1.  There  is  a  continuous  fketch  of  the  Queen's  reign,  running 
through  the  tract.  The  reader  may  follow  it  efpecially  on  pp. 
18-21,  23,  24,  31-34,  59,  60. 

2.  An  interefting  fketch  is  given  of  the  rife  of  the  Houfe  of 
Dudley,  under  the  heading  Leicejier. 

The  account  of  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  is  difpaffionate,  confidering 
Naunton  was  Secretary  of  State  at  the  time  of  his  execution  ; 
and  it  was  evidently  written  after  the  death  of  James  I. 

Naunton  was  very  well  acquainted  with  Lord  Effex  :  and  his 
account  of  him  is  mingled  with  a  hearty  denunciation  of  his  bad 
advifers. 

The  particulars  given  of  Sir  Charles  Blount,  the  laft  Lord 
Mountjoy,  are  related  with  the  circumftantial  fulnefs  of  an  Eye- 

1  J.  Caulfield,  Memoirs,  /.  i6.     Ed.  1814. 


I  lit  rod II  tl ion.  9 

Witnefs.  Sir  Charles'  firfl  coming  to  Court  ;^  his  excellent  Tilt- 
ing; Lord  EfTex's  infult  to  him.  with  their  fubfequent  duel  and 
friendfliip  ;'  his  dealing  away  to  the  Army  under  Sir  John  Norris, 
with  the  rating  the  Queen  gave  him  on  his  recall  ;^  &c.,  &c. 

3.  "The  principall  note  of  her  Reign  will  be,  that  flie  ruled 
much  by  faclion  and  parties,  which  her  felf  both  made,  upheld, 
and  weakened,  as  her  own  great  judgement  advifed.  For  I  dif- 
afTent  for  the  common  received  opinion,  that  my  Lord  of  Leicejler 
was  abfolute  and  above  all  in  her  grace.  ...  I  know  it  from 
affured  intelligence,  that  it  was  not  fo."*  So  Naunton  herein 
refers  to  the  following  flanding  Court  feuds,  viz.  : — of 

(i)  Robert  DLDLEV,£'«r/^)-^  (Thomas Radcliffe,  EarloJ 

Leicester  f  (     Sussex,  .  .         17,29-30 

(2)  The  same  assistiner  the  en- )     -.«      »»  ^-      xt«„   .     r      -i 

*  '        ,-      ^^, ,.^  f     •,         J-with     the  entire  NoREVS  family,  39-41 

tire  Knollvs  family      )  j  >  j:^  t 

(3)  3':>JoHN  Perrot  with    6'z>  Christopher  Hatton,         41-44 

(4)  Robert DEVEREUX,£'ar/).,   (  General  Sir  John  Norrevs 

^t/'Essex  I  i     or  Norris,        .  .  53 

(5)  The   Howards  and  the  j     •,  J  Robert  Deverevx,  Earl  0/ 


■  with 


Cecils  )  ''^""  (     Essex    ...  56,  54 

4.  As  in  theEffay,  the  fame  Noblemen  are  often  referred  to  under 
different  names,  with  the  view  of  preferving  their  identity  and  in 
fome  degree  fupplying  dates,  their  fucceffive  titles  are  given  at 
pp.  2-4.  Naunton  divides  his  worthies  into  Togati^nd  Militia: 
Gown-men  and  Swords-men.  We  have  there  diflinguifhed  fuch  of 
them  as  he  has  done,  by  prefixing  to  their  names  A/or  T^refpedlively . 

5.  '  The  Queen  was  never  profufe  in  the  delivering  out  of  her 
treafure,  but  payed  many,  and  moft  of  her  fervants  part  in  money, 
and  the  reft  with  grace,  which  as  the  cafe  stood,  was  taken  for 
good  payment,  leaving  the  Arrear  of  recompence  due  to  their 
merit,  to  her  great  Succeffor,  who  payed  them  all  with  advan- 
tage.'' In  fupport  of  this  flatement,  it  may  be  mentioned  that 
James  I.  created  2373  Knights  during  his  reign,  whereof  900 
were  made  during  its  firfl  year.  For  their  names,  see  y.  Philipot's 
A  Perfect  Colledtion  of  all  the  Knights  Bachelors^  &c.  London, 
1660.  In  this  lift  Sir  R.  Naunton's  name  appears  under  date 
Sept.  7,  1614. 

Frag)7ieiita  Regalia  naturally  deals  more  with  the 
Court  than  the  People  :  but  flrangely  omits  all  notice 
of  Drake,  Hawkins,  and  the  other  Sea  Heroes  of  that 
time,  although  they  were  well  known  at  Court,  and 
often  in  the  Queen's  favour.  In  it  there  is  Contem- 
porary Evidence  as  well  as  Hearfay;  and  we  cannot 
fpare  any  truth  of  that  momentous  age,  in  the  midR  of 
which  our  Faery  Qiieeii  ruled  the  hearts  and  deflinies 
oi  fome  of  the  wilefl,  bravefl,  and  befl  of  Englifhmen. 

^  /•  57-  ^  P-  52,  53-  ^  /•  33-  ■•  P-  16.  6  /.  50. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY. 
^raigmettta:  Jlegalia. 

(a)  Is2i«0  in  tf)e  author's  lifdime- 

None. 

(6)  Isgueg  since  tf)e  Suitor's  Ucatf). 

I.  .<4j  «  separate  publication. 

1.  1641.  [London.]  ^^zV/,?    Princeps.  FRAGMENTA     REGALIA. 
I  vol.  4to.       Written  by  Sir  Robert  Naunton,  Master  of  the  Court 

^Wards.  ^xxax&d,.  Anno  Dont.  1641.  [Contains  43  num- 
bered pp.  ] 

2.  1642.    [London.]    Fragmenta  Regalia   .    .    ,    ,    Written  by  Sir  Robert 
I  vol.  4to.      Naunton,  Master  of  the  Court  of  Wards.     Printed.  An/io 

Dom.  16^2.     [Contains  40  numbered  pp.] 

3.  1653.     London,     i  vol.  i2mo.     See  title  upon  opposite  page. 

10.  1814.  London.  The  Court  of  Queen  Elizabeth  originally  written  by  Sir 

I  vol.  fol.       Robert  Naunton,  under  the  title  of  Fraginenta  Regalia. 
With  considerable  biographical  additions  by  J.\mes  Caul- 
-     FIELD  [a  bookseller  in  Wells  Street,  Oxford  Street].     With 
Portraits.     [A  Reprint  of  No.   1.] 

11.  15  Jan.  1S70.  Lond.     1  vol.  8vo.     English  Reprints',  see  title  at/.  1. 

II.   With  other  works. 

4.  1694.     London.     Arcana  Aulica  :  or  Walsingham's  Manuel  of  Prnden- 

1  vol.  i2mo.  tial  Maxims,  for  the  States  Man  and  Courtier.     To  which 

is  added  Fraginenta  Regalia.  .  .  .  [This  latter  has  a  sepa- 
rate title  and  occupies  ^^.  i^-j-z/^-j.  It  is  apparently  a  re- 
print of  No.  3.] 

6.  1707-8.  London.      The  Phenix:  or  a  Revival  of  Scarce  and  Valuable 

2  vols.  Svo.    Pieces  of  Remote  Antiquity  down   to  the   Present  Times 

[projected  by  John  Dunton].  Fragn/enta  Regalia  is 
Art.  VII.  and  occupies  /.  181-221.  [Apparently  printed  from 
No.  3.] 

The  first  volume,  Naunton's  tract  included,  was  reissued 
in  1721,  under  a  fresh  title. 

6.  1721.     London.    A  collection  of  Choice,  Scarce,  and  Valuable  Tracts. 
1  vol.  Svo.      .  .   .  By  a  Gentleman  who  has  search'd  after  them,  for  above 

Twenty  Years. 

7.  1797.     London.     Paul  Hentzner's  Travels  in  England.  .  .  .  To  which 
I  vol.  Svo.      is  now  added  Sir  Robert  Naunton's  Fragmenta  Regalia. 

.  .  .  With  Portraits  and  Views.  Price  i^s.  in  Boards;  and 
il.  IS.  bound  in  Morooco.  [This  Reprint  of  No.  1  occupies 
pp.  77-151  of  the  volume.] 

8.  1808.    Edinburgh.     Memoirs  of  Robert  Car[e]y  ;  [Son  of  Lord  HuNS- 
I  vol.  Svo.      DON,  see  p.  3]  Earl  of  Monmouth.     Written  by  himself. 

And  Fragmenta  Regalia  being  a  History  of  Queen  Eliza- 
beth's Favourites  by  Sir  Robert  Naunton.  With  explana- 
tory annotations.  [By  Sir  W.  Scott.  ]  Fragitienta  Regalia 
occupies//.  169-301. 

9.  1808-13.   London.   The  Harleian  Miscellany.     Ed.  byT.  Park.  F.S.A. 
10  vols.  4to.     [A  Reprint  of  No.  1.      It  occupies  ii.  81-108,  published 

in  1809.] 


Fragment  a  Regalia : 

OR, 

O  B  S  E  RVAT IONS 

on  the  late  Queen 

ELIZABETH 

Her  Times,  and  Favourites. 


Written    by    Sir    Robert 

N  A  u  N  T  o  N,    Mafter   of 

the  Court  of  Wards. 


LONDON, 

Printed  by  G.  Dawfon,  for  William 
Sheares^  at  the  Bible  neer  the  Little  North- 
door  of  S.  Pauls  Church.     1653 


Fragmenta  Regalia, 

O  R, 

Obfervations  on  the  late  Queen 

ELIZABETH, 

Her  Times,  and  Favourites. 


O  take  her  in  the  Original!,  She 
was  daughter  to  Henry  the  eighth, 
by  A7i7ie  Bulle7i^  the  fecond  of  fix 
Wives  which  He  had,  and  one  of 
the  Maids  of  Honour  to  the  di- 
vorced Queen  Katherine  of  Aiiflria 
(or  as  they  flile  it)  Infaiita  of  Spam, 
and  from  thence  taken  into  the 
Royall  Bed. 
That  She  was  not  of  a  moft  Noble  and  Royall  ex- 
tract by  Her  Father,  will  not  fall  into  queflion :  for 
on  that  fide  there  was  difimbogued  into  her  veines  by 
a  confluence  of  Bloud,  the  very  abfLra6t  of  all  the 
greatefl  houfes  in  Chriflendome ;  and  remarkable  it  is 
concerning  that  violent  defertion  of  the  Royall  Houfe 
of  the  Britaiiis^  by  the  invafion  of  the  Saxons,  and 
aftenvards  by  the  Conquefl  of  the  Noniians,  that  by 
the  viciffitude  of  times,  and  through  a  difcontinuance 
(ahnofl  a  thuufand  yeares)  the  Royall  Scepter  fhould 
fall  back  into  the  Current  of  the  old  Britifh  bloud,  in 


14  Queen  Elizabeth's 

the  perfon  of  her  renowned  Grandfather  Henry  the 
Seventh,  together  with  whatfoever  the  German^  Nor- 
man^ Burgundian,  CaJIalian,  and  Fre?tch  Atchieve- 
ments,  with  the  intermarriages,  which  eight  hundred 
years  had  acquired,  incorporated,  and  brought  back 
into  the  old  Royall  Line. 

By  her  Mother  Ihe  was  of  no  Soveraign  defcent, 
yet  Noble,  and  very  ancient  in  the  Name  and  Family 
of  Biilkn,  though  fome  erronioufly  brand  it  with  a 
Citizens  rife  or  originall,  which  was  yet  but  of  a 
fecond  Brother,  who  (as  it  were)  divining  the  great- 
neffe  and  luflre  to  come  to  his  Houfe,  was  fent  into 
the  City  to  acquire  wealth,  ad  CEdificandum  antiquam 
domum.  Unto  whofe  atchievements  (for  he  was  Lord 
Mayor  of  London)  fell  in,  as  it  was  averred,  both  the 
bloud  and  inheritance  of  the  eldefl  Brother,  for  want 
of  iffue  Male,  by  which  accumulation,  the  Houfe 
within  a  few  defcents  mounted  i?t  Cuhnen  ho?ioris,  and 
was  fuddenly  elated  into  the  befl  Families  of  England 
and  Ireland,  as  Hoivard,  Ormund,  Sackvile,  and  divers 
others.  Having  thus  toucht,  and  now  leaving. her 
flirp,  I  come  to  her  Perfon ;  and  as  fhe  came  to  the 
Crown  by  the  deceafe  of  her  Brother  and  Sifter.  Un- 
der Edward  She  was  his,  and  one  of  the  darlings  of 
Fortune  :  for  befides  the  confideration  of  Bloud,  there 
was  between  thefe  two  Princes  a  concurrency  and 
fympathy  in  their  natures  and  affections,  together  with 
the  Celeftiall  (conformity  in  Religion)  which  made 
them  one,  and  friends ;  for  the  King  ever  called  her 
his  fweeteft  and  deareft  Sifter,  aud  was  fcarce  his  own 
man.  She  being  abfent,  which  was  not  fo  between  him. 
and  the  Lady  Mary.  Under  his  Sifter  She  found  her 
condition  much  altered  :  For  it  was  refolved,  and  her 
deftiny  had  decreed  to  fet  her  an  Apprentice  in  the 
School  of  Afflidlion,  and  to  draw  her  through  the 
Ordeall  fire  of  tryall,  the  better  to  mould  and  faftiion 
her  to  rule  and  Soveraign ty ;  which  finifhed,  and 
Fortune  calling  to  mind,  that  the  time  of  her  fervitude 
was  expired,  gave  up  her  Indentures,  and  therewith 


Favourites.  15 

delivered  up  into  her  cuftody  a  Scepter,  as  a  reward 
for  her  patience,  which  was  about  the  twenty  fixth 
year  of  her  Age ;  a  time  in  which  (as  for  externals) 
fhe  was  full  blown,  fo  was  fhe  for  her  internals  grown 
ripe,  and  feafoned  with  adverfity,  and  in  the  exercife 
of  her  Vertue  ;  for  it  feems  Fortune  meant  no  more, 
than  to  fliew  her  a  piece  of  her  variety,  and  change- 
ableneffe  of  her  Nature,  and  fo  to  condu6l  her  to  her 
dellined  Felicity.  She  was  of  perfonage  tall,  of  hair 
and  complexion  fair,  and  therewith  well  favoured,  but 
high  nofed,  of  limbs  and  feature  neat,  and  which 
added  to  the  luflre  of  thofe  extenour  Graces,  of  Stately 
and  Majeflick  comportment ;  participating  in  this 
more  of  her  Father  than  Mother,  who  was  of  inferiour 
allay,  plaufible,  or  as  the  French  hath  it,  more  de- 
bofiaire  and  affable,  vertues  which  might  well  fuit  with 
Majefly;  and  which  defcending,  as  Hereditary  to  the 
daughter,  did  render  of  a  more  fweeter  temper,  and 
endeared  her  more  to  the  love  and  liking  of  the  peo- 
ple; who  gave  her  the  name  and  fame  of  a  mod 
gracious  and  popular  Prince ;  the  atrocity  of  her 
Fathers  nature,  being  rebated  in  hers,  by  the  Mothers 
fweeter  inclinations.  For  to  take,  and  that  no  more 
than  the  Chara(5ler  out  of  his  own  mouth  ;  He  never 
fpared  man  in  his  anger,  nor  woman  in  his  lull. 

If  we  fearch  further  into  her  intelledluals  and  abil- 
ities, the  whole  courfe  of  Government  deciphers  them 
to  the  admiration  of  poflerity ;  for  it  was  full  of  mag- 
nanimity, tempered  with  Juflice,  and  Piety;  and  to 
fpeak  truly,  noted  but  with  one  adl  or  taint ;  all  her 
deprivations  either  of  life  or  liberty,  being  legall,  and 
neceffitated  :  She  was  learned  (her  fex,  and  the  time 
confidered)  beyond  common  belief;  for  letters  about 
this  time,  and  fomewhat  before,  began  to  be  of  efleem 
and  in  fafhion,  the  former  ages  being  overcaft  with  the 
mifls  and  fogs  of  the  Romane  ignorance  ;  and  it  was 
the  maxime  that  over-ruled  the  foregoing  times,  that 
ignorance  was  the  mother  of  devotion  Her  warres 
were  a  long  time  more  in  the  auxiliary  part,  in  affift- 


1 6  Queen  Elizabeth's  Favourites. 

ance  of  forraign  Princes  and  States,  than  by  invafion 
of  any,  till  common  policie  advifed  it  for  a  fafer  way, 
to  flrike  firfl  abroad,  than  at  home  to  expedl  the  warre, 
in  all  which  fhe  was  felicious  and  vidlorious.  The 
change  and  alteration  of  Religion  upon  the  inftant  of 
her  acceffion  (the  fmoak  and  fire  of  her  Sifters  Mar- 
tyrdomes  fcarcely  quenched)  was  none  of  her  lead 
remarkable  accounts :  But  the  fupport  and  eftablifh- 
ment  thereof,  with  the  meanes  of  her  fubfiftence, 
amidft  fo  powerfuU  enemies  abroad,  and  thofe  many 
domeftique  pradlifes,  were  (me  thinks)  works  of  in- 
fpiration,  and  of  no  humane  providence,  which  on  her 
Sifters  departure  ftie  moft  religioufly  acknowledged, 
afcribing  the  glory  of  her  deliverance  to  God  alone  : 
for  fhe  received  the  news  both  of  the  Queens  death, 
and  her  Proclamation,  by  the  generall  confent  of  the 
Houfe,  and  the  publike  fuffrage  of  the  people,  whereat, 
falling  on  her  knees  (after  a  good  time  of  refpiration) 
fhe  uttered  this  Verfe  of  the  Pfalms,  A  Domino  fadliim 
ejl  ijitid,  et  ejl  7ni7^abile  in  oculis  noJl7'is^  which  we  find 
to  this  day  on  the  ftamp  of  her  gold,  with  this  on  her 
filver,  Pofui  Deum  adjiitoreni  nieiini.  Her  Minifters 
and  Inftruments  of  State,  fuch  as  were  participes  cur- 
arwn,  and  bear  a  great  part  of  the  burthen,  were 
many,  and  thofe  memorable,  but  they  were  onely 
Favourites,  not  Minions ;  fuch  as  a6led  more  by  her 
own  Princely  rules  and  judgements,  than  by  their  own 
wills  and  appetites,  which  fhe  obferved  to  the  laft :  for 
we  find  no  Gave/ion,  Ve7^e,  or  Spence7%  to  have  fwayed 
alone,  during  forty  four  yeares,  which  was  a  well  fettled 
and  advifed  Maxime ;  for  it  valued  her  the  more,  it 
awed  the  moft  fecure,  and  it  took  beft  with  the  people, 
and  it  ftarved  all  emulations,  which  are  apt  to  rife  and 
vent  in  obloquious  acrimony  (even  againft  the  Prince) 
where  there  is  onely  A7nator  Palatii. 

The  principall  note  of  her  Reign  will  be,  that  fhe 
ruled  much  by  fa6lion  and  parties,  which  her  felf  both 
made,  upheld,  and  weakened,  as  her  own  great  judge- 
ment advifed.     For  I  difaffent  from  the  common  re- 


Favotiritcs.  17 

ceived  opinion,  that  my  Lord  of  Leicejler  was  abfolute 
and  above  all  in  her  Grace  :  and  though  I  come 
fomewhat  fliort  of  the  knowledge  of  thofe  times,  yet 
(that  I  might  not  rove,  and  fhoot  at  randome)  I  know  it 
from  allured  intelligence,  that  it  was  not  fo.  For  proof 
whereof  (among  many  that  I  could  prefent)  I  will  both 
relate  a  fhcrt,  and  therein  a  known  truth,  And  it  was 
thus.  Bowyer^  a  Gentleman  of  the  Black  rod,  being 
charged  by  her  expreffe  command  to  look  precifely  to 
all  admiffions  into  the  Privy- Chamber,  one  day  flayed 
a  very  gay  Captain,  and  a  follower  of  my  Lord  of 
Leicejicrs,  from  entrance ;  For  that  he  was  neither 
well  known,  nor  a  fworn  fervant  to  the  Queen  :  at 
which  repulfe,  the  Gentleman  bearing  high  on  my 
Lords  favor,  told  him,  he  might  perchance  procure 
him  a  difcharge  :  Leicejler  coming  into  the  contefla- 
tion,  faid  publikely  (which  was  none  of  his  wont)  that 
he  was  a  Knave,  and  fliould  not  continue  long  in  his 
office ;  and  fo  turning  about  to  go  in  to  the  Queen, 
Bowyer  (who  was  a  bold  Gentleman,  and  well  beloved) 
flept  before  him,  and  fell  at  her  Majeflies  feet,  related 
the  flory,  and  humbly  craves  her  Graces  pleafure;  and 
whether  my  Lord  of  Leicejler  \\2iS  King,  or  her  Majefly 
Queen  ?  Whereunto  fhe  replyed  with  her  wonted 
oath  (Gods  death)  my  Lord,  I  have  wifht  you  well, 
but  my  favour  is  not  fo  lockt  up  for  you,  that  others 
(hall  not  partake  thereof;  for  I  have  many  fervants, 
unto  whom  I  have,  and  will  at  my  pleafure  bequeath 
my  favour,  and  likewife  refume  the  fame ;  and  if  you 
think  to  rule  here,  I  will  take  a  courfe  to  fee  you 
forth-coming  :  I  will  have  here  but  one  Miflrefs,  and 
no  Mafler,  and  look  that  no  ill  happen  to  him,  left  it 
be  feverely  required  at  your  hands.  Which  fo  quelled 
my  Lord  of  Leicejler,  that  his  fained  humility  was  long 
after  one  of  his  bed  vertues.  Moreover  the  Earl  of 
Sujjfex,  then  Lord  Chamberlain,  was  his  profefl  An- 
tagonifl  to  his  dying  day.  And  for  my  Lord  of 
Hunjdoti  and  Sir  Thomas  Sackvile,  after  Lord  Trea- 
furer,  (who  were  all  Contemporaries)  he  was  wont  to 

B 


1 8  Quee7t  Elizabeth's 

fay  of  them,  that  they  were  of  the  Tribe  of  Dan,  and 
were  Noli  me  tangere^s;  implying,  that  they  were  not  to 
be  contefled  with,  for  they  were  indeed  of  the  Queens 
neer  kindred.  From  whence,  and  in  more  inflances 
I  conclude,  that  flie  was  abfolute  and  foveraign  Mifl- 
refs  of  her  Graces  ;  and  that  all  thofe,  to  whom  fhe 
diftributed  her  favours,  were  never  more  than  Tenants 
at  will,  and  flood  on  no  better  ground  than  her 
Princely  pleafure,  and  their  own  good  behaviour. 
And  this  alfo  I  prefent  as  a  known  obfervation,  that 
fhe  was  (though  very  capable  of  Counfell)  abfolute 
enough  in  her  own  refolutions,  which  was  ever  ap- 
parent even  to  her  lafl,  in  that  her  averfation  to  grant 
Tirone  the  leafl  drop  of  her  mercy,  though  earneftly 
and  frequently  advifed,  yea,  wrought  only  ,by  the 
whole  Councell  of  State,  v/ith  very  many  preffmg 
reafons,  and  as  the  flate  of  her  Kingdome  then  flood, 
(I  may  fpeak  it  with  affurance)  neceffitated  Arguments. 
If  we  look  into  her  inclination,  as  it  is  difpofed  either 
to  magnificence  or  frugality,  we  fhall  find  in  them 
many  notable  confiderations,  for  all  her  difpenfations 
were  fo  poyfed,  as  though  difcretion  and  juflice  had 
both  agreed  to  fland  at  the  beam,  and  fee  them 
weighed  out  in  due  proportion,  the  maturity  of  her 
years  and  judgement  meeting  in  a  concurrency,  and 
at  fuch  an  age  as  feldome  lapfeth  to  exceffe.  To  con- 
fider  them  apart :  We  have  not  many  prefidents  of  her 
liberality,  or  of  any  large  donatives  to  particular  men ; 
my  Lord  of  Ejfex  Book  of  Parks  only  excepted,  which 
was  a  Princely  gift,  and  fome  few  more  of  a  leffer  fize 
to  my  Lord  of  LeiceJIcr,  Hatton^  and  others.  Her 
rewards  confifled  chiefly  in  grants  of  Leafes  of  Offices, 
Places  of  Judicature :  but  for  ready  money,  and  in 
any  great  fummes,  fhe  was  very  fparing ;  which  we 
partly  conceive  was  a  vertue  rather  drawn  from  necef- 
fity,  than  her  nature,  for  flie  had  many  layings  out, 
and  to  her  lafl  period.  And  I  am  of  opinion  with  S. 
Walter  jRawliegh,  that  thofe  many  brave  men  of  our 
times,  and  of  the  Miliiia,  tafled  little  more  of  her 


Favourites,  19 

bounty  than  in  her  grace  and  good  word,  with  their 
due  entertainment,  for  (lie  ever  paid  the  Souldiers 
well,  which  was  the  honour  of  her  times,  and  more 
than  her  great  adverfary  of  Spain  could  perform.  So 
that  when  we  come  to  the  confideration  of  her  fruc^al- 
ity,  the  obfer\'ation  will  be  little  more,  than  that  her 
bounty  and  it  were  fo  inter-woven  together,  that  the 
one  was  fuited  by  an  honourable  way  of  fpending,  the 
other  limited  by  a  neceffitated  way  of  fparing.  The 
Irifh  aclion  we  may  call  a  malady,  and  a  confumption 
of  her  times,  for  it  accompanied  her  to  her  end ;  and 
it  was  of  fo  profufe  and  vafl  an  expence,  that  it  drew 
neer  a  diflemperature  of  State,  and  of  paffion  in  her 
felf :  For  toward  her  lafl  fhe  grew  hard  to  pleafe  ;  her 
Arms  being  accuflomed  to  profperity,  and  the  Irifli 
profecution  not  anfwering  her  expectation  and  wonted 
fucceffe  for  a  good  while,  it  was  an  unthrifty  and  in- 
aufpitious  war,  which  did  much  diflurb  and  miflead 
her  judgement,  and  the  more,  for  that  it  was  a  pre- 
fident  which  was  taken  out  of  her  own  pattern :  For 
as  the  Queen  (by  way  of  diverfion)  had  at  the  coming 
to  the  Crown  fupported  the  revolted  States  of  Holland ^ 
fo  did  the  King  of  Spain  turn  the  trick  on  her  felf 
towards  her  going  out,  by  cherifhing  the  Irifli  re- 
bellion. Where  it  falls  into  confideration,  what  the 
State  of  the  Kingdome  and  the  Crown-Revenues  were 
then  able  to  embrace  and  endure ;  if  we  look  into  the 
eflablifliment  of  thofe  times,  with  the  lift  of  the  Irifh 
Amiy,  confidering  the  dcfeatments  oi Blackwater^  with 
all  precedent  expences,  as  it  flood  from  my  Lord  of 
EJfex  undertaking  to  the  furrender  of  Ki?2gfale  under 
the  Generall  Moiintjoy\  and  fomewhat  after;  we  fliall 
find  the  Horfe  and  Foot  Troops  were  for  three  or  four 
yeares  together,  much  about  20000.  Which  befides 
the  Navall  charge,  which  was  a  dependant  of  the  fame 
Warre,  in  that  the  Queen  was  then  forced  to  keep  in 
continuall  pay  a  flrong  Fleet  at  Sea,  to  attend  the 
SpaniHi  Coafls  and  Ports,  both  to  allanim  the  Spaniard, 
and  to  intercept  his  Forces  defigned  for  the  Irifh  affi- 


20  Queen  Elizabeth's 

fiance :  fo  that  the  charge  of  that  Wane  alone  did 
cofl  the  Queen  300000].  per  annum  at  leafl,  which 
was  not  the  moity  of  her  disburfments,  an  expence 
which  (without  the  pubhque  ayd)  the  State  and  the 
Royall  receipts  could  not  have  much  longer  endured ; 
which  out  of  her  own  frequent  Letters  and  complauits 
to  the  Deputy  Mountjoy^  for  caHieering  part  of  that 
Lift  as  foon  as  he  could,  may  be  colledled,  for  the 
Queen  was  then  driven  into  a  flrait. 

We  are  naturally  prone  to  applaud  the  times  behind 
us,  and  to  vilifie  the  prefent :  for  the  current  of  her 
fame  carries  it  to  this  day,  how  Royally  and  vi6lori- 
oufly  fhe  lived  and  dyed,  without  the  grievance  and 
grudge  of  the  people  ;  yet  that  truth  may  appear  with- 
out retra6lion  from  the  Honour  of  fo  great  a  Princeffe, 
it  is  manifefl  fhe  left  more  debts  unpaid,  taken  upon 
the  credit  of  her  Privy  Scales,  then  her  Progenitors 
did,  or  could  have  taken  up  that  way,  in  a  hundred 
yeares  before  her ;  which  was  an  enforced  piece  of 
State,  to  lay  the  burthen  on  that  horfe,  that  was  beft 
able  to  bear  it,  at  the  dead  lift,  when  neither  her 
receipts  could  yield  her  relief  at  the  pinch,  nor  the 
urgency  of  her  affaires  endure  the  delays  of  a  Par- 
liamentary affiflance  :  And  for  fuch  ayds  it  is  like- 
wile  apparent,  That  flie  received  more,  and  with  the 
love  of  the  people,  than  any  two  of  her  Predeceffors, 
that  took  moft ;  which  was  a  Fortune  drained  out  of 
the  Subje6l,  through  the  plaufibility  of  her  Comport- 
ment, and,  as  I  would  fay  without  offence,  the  prodi- 
gail  diflribution  of  her  Graces  to  all  forts  of  Subje6ls  : 
For  I  believe,  no  Prince  living,  that  was  fo  tender 
of  Honour,  and  fo  exa6lly  flood  for  the  prefervation 
of  Soveraignty,  that  was  fo  great  a  Courtier  of  her 
people,  yea,  of  the  Commons,  and  that  floopt  and 
defcended  lower  in  prefenting  her  perfon  to  the  pub- 
lique  view,  as  fhe  pad  in  her  Progreffes  and  Peram- 
bulations;  and  in  the  ejaculation  of  her  prayers  on 
her  people.  And  truly,  though  much  may  be  given 
in  praife  of  her  magnanimity,  and  therewith  comply 


Favourites.  2 1 

with  her  Parliaments,  and  for  all  that  come  off  at  lafl 
with  honour  and  profit ;  yet  mufl  we  afcribe  fome  part 
of  the  commendation  to  the  wifdomes  of  the  times, 
and  the  choice  of  Parliament  men  :  for  I  find  not 
that  they  were  at  any  time  given  to  any  violent  or 
pertinatioiis  difpiite,  eledlions  being  made  of  grave 
and  difcreet  perfons,  not  facflioiis  and  ambitious  of 
fame ;  fuch  as  came  not  to  the  Houfe  with  a  male- 
volent fpirit  of  contention,  but  with  a  preparation  to 
confult  on  the  publique  good,  rather  to  com})ly  than 
conted  with  her  JNIajefly  :  Neither  doe  I  find,  that  the 
Houfe  was  at  any  time  weakned  and  peflered  with 
the  admiffion  of  too  many  young  heads,  as  it  hath 
been  of  later  times ;  which  remembers  me  of  Recorder 
Martins  Speecli,  about  the  tenth  of  our  late  Soveraign 
Lord  King  lames ^  when  there  were  accounts  taken  of 
forty  Gentlemen,  not  above  twenty,  and  fome  not  ex- 
ceeding fixteen  ;  which  moved  him  to  fay.  That  it  was 
the  ancient  cuftome  for  old  men  to  make  Lawes  for 
young  ones,  but  that  then  he  faw  the  cafe  altered,  and 
that  there  were  children  ele6led  unto  the  great  Coun- 
cell  of  the  Kingdome,  which  came  to  invade  and 
invert  nature,  and  to  enadl  Laws  to  govern  their 
Fathers.  Sure  we  are,  the  Houfe  alwayes  took  the 
common  caufe  into  their  confideration,  and  they  faw 
the  Queen  had  jufl  occafion,  and  need  enough  to  ufe 
their  affiflance ;  neither  doe  I  remember  that  the 
Houfe  did  ever  capitulate  or  preferre  their  private  to 
the  publique,  the  Queens  neceffities,  etc.  but  waited 
their  times,  and  in  the  firfl  place  gave  their  fupply, 
and  according  to  the  exigency  of  her  affaires ;  yet 
failed  not  at  lafl  to  obtain  what  they  defired,  fo  that 
the  Queen  and  her  Parliaments  had  ever  the  good 
Fortune  to  depart  in  love,  and  on  reciprocall  tearmcs 
which  are  confiderations  which  have  not  been  fo  exadlly 
obferved  in  our  lafl  affemblies,  as  they  might,  and  I 
would  to  God  they  had  been  :  for  confidering  the 
great  debt  left  on  the  King,  and  in  what  incumbrances 
the  Houfe  it  felf  had  then  drawn  him,  his  Majefly  was 


2  2  Queen  Elizabeth's 

not  well   iifed,  though   I   lay  not  the  blame  on  the 
whole  fuffrage  of  the  Houfe,  where  he  had  many  good 
friends  ;  for  I  dare  avouch,  had  the  Koufe  been  freed 
of  half  a  dozen  of  popular  and  difcontented  perfons, 
fuch  as  (with   the  fellow  that  burnt  the  Temple  at 
Ephefics)  would  be  talked  of,  though  but  for  doing  of 
mifchief,  I  am  confident  the  King  had  obtained,  that 
which  in  reafon,  and  at  his  firfl  acceffion,  he  ought  to 
have  received  freely,  and  without  any  condition.     But 
pardon  the  digreffion,  which  is  here  remembred,  not 
m  the  way  of  aggravation,  but  in  true  zeal  to  the  pub- 
lique  good,  and  prefented  in  caveat  to  future  times  ; 
for  I  am  not  ignorant  how  the  fpirit  of  the  Kingdome 
now  moves  to  make  his  Majefly  amends  on  any  occa- 
fion,  and  how  defirous  the  Subjedl  is  to  expiate  that 
offence  at  any  rate,  may  it  pleafe  his  Majefly  gracioufly 
to  make  tryall  of  his  Subjedls  affe6lion,  and  at  what 
price  they  now  value  his  goodneffe  and  magnanimity. 
But  to  our  purpofe,  the  Queen  was  not  to  learn,  that 
as  the  ftrength  of  her  Kingdome  confifted  in  the  mul- 
titude of  her  Subje6ls,  fo  the  fecurity  of  her  perfon 
refled  in  the  love  and  fidelity  of  her  people ;  which 
Are  politiquely  affe(5led  (as  it  hath  been  thought)  fome- 
what  beneath  the  height  of  her  fpirit,  and  natural 
magnanimity.     Moreover  it  will  be  a  true  note  of  her 
providence,  that  flie  would  alwayes  liflen  to  her  profit, 
for  fhe  would  not  refufe  the  informations  of  mean 
perfons,  with  purpofed  improvement,  and  had  learned 
the   Phylofophy  of  Hoc  agere,  to  look  into  her  own 
work ;  of  the  which  there  is  a  notable  example  of  one 
Carwardeiz,   an   under-Ofhcer   of  the    Cuflom-houfe, 
who  obferving  his  time,  prefented  her  with  a  paper, 
fhewing  how  fhe  was  abufed  in  the  under-renting  of 
her  Cuflomes,  and  therewithall  humbly  defired  her 
Majefly  to  conceal  him,  for  that  it  did  concern  two  or 
three  of  her  great  Councellours,  whom  Cuflomer  Smith 
had  bribed  with  200I.  a  man,  fo  to  lofe  the  Queen 
2 cool,  per  annum ^  which  being  made  known  to  the 
Lords,  they  gave  flri6t  order,  that  Carwarden  fhould 


Favoicj^ites.  23 

not  have  acceffe  to  the  back-flairs ;  till  at  lafl,  her 
Majefly  fmelling  the  craft,  and  miffing  Caricarderi, 
fhe  fent  for  him  back,  and  encouraged  him  to  fland  to 
his  information  ;  which  the  poor  man  did  fo  hand- 
fomely,  that  wiihin  the  fpacc  of  ten  yeares,  he  brought 
Sfnith  to  double  his  rent,  or  to  leave  the  cufloms  to 
new  Farmers.  So  that  we  mav  take  this  alfo  into 
obfer\-ation ;  that  there  were  of  the  Queens  Councell, 
that  were  not  in  the  Catalogue  of  Saints. 

Now  as  we  have  taken  a  view  of  fome  particular 
notions  of  her  times,  her  nature,  and  neceffities  :  It  is 
not  without  the  text,  to  give  a  fliort  touch  on  the 
helps,  and  advantages  of  her  reign,  which  were  without 
parallell,  for  flie  had  neither  husband,  brother,  fifter, 
nor  children  to  provide  for,  who  as  they  are  depend- 
ants of  the  Crown,  fo  doe  they  neceffarily  draw  main- 
tenance from  thence,  and  do  oftentimes  exhaufl  and 
draw  deep,  efpecially  when  there  is  an  ample  frater- 
nity of  the  bloud  Royall,  and  of  the  Princes  of  the 
Bloud,  as  it  was  in  the  time  of  Edward  the  third,  and 
Hc7iry  the  fourth  ;  for  when  the  Crown  cannot,  the 
jDublique  ought  to  give  them  honourable  allowance ; 
for  they  are  the  honour  and  hopes  of  the  Kingdom, 
and  the  publique,  which  enjoyes  them,  hath  a  like  in- 
terefl  in  them  with  the  Father  that  begot  them  :  and 
our  Common-Law,  which  is  the  heritance  of  the 
Kingdome,  did  ever  of  old  provide  ayds  for  the 
Prirnogeniiures^  and  the  eldefl  daughter.  So  that  the 
multiplicity  of  Courts,  and  the  great  charge  which 
neceffarily  follow  a  King,  and  Queen,  a  Prince  and 
the  Royall  Iffue,  was  a  thing  which  was  not  in  re7'iL7n 
natura,  during  the  fpace  of  forty  years,  and  which  by 
time  was  worn  out  of  memory,  and  without  the  con- 
fideration  of  the  prefent  times.  Infomuch,  that  the 
aydes  given  to  the  late  and  right  noble  Prince  Henry, 
and  to  his  Sifler  the  Lady  Elizabeth,  were  at  firfl 
generally  received  for  Impofitions  of  a  new  Coynage. 
Yea,  the  late  Impofitions  for  Knighthood  (though  an 
ancient  Law)  fell  alfo  into  the  imputation  of  a  tax  of 


24  Queen  Elizabeth's 

novelty,  for  that  it  lay  long  covered  in  the  embers  of 
divifion,  between  the  Houfes  of  York  and  Lancajier^ 
and  forgotten,  or  connived  at  by  the  fucceeding  Prin- 
ces :  So  that  the  ftrangeneffe  of  the  obfervation,  and 
difference  of  thofe  later  reignes  is,  that  the  Queen  took 
up  beyond  the  power  of  the  Law,  which  fell  not  into 
the  murmure  of  the  people;  and  her  fucceffors  nothing, 
but  by  warrant  of  the  Law,  which  nevertheleffe  was 
conceived  (through  difufe)  to  be  injurious  to  the 
liberty  of  the  Kingdome. 

Now  before  I  come  to  any  further  mention  of  her 
Favourites,  (for  hitherto  I  have  delivered  but  fome 
obvious  paffages,  thereby  to  prepare  and  fmooth  a 
way  for  the  red  that  follows)  it  is  requifite  that  I  touch 
on  the  reliques  of  the  other  raign,  I  mean  the  body  of 
her  Sifters  Councel  of  State,  which  fhe  retained  intire  ; 
neither  removing,  nor  difcontenting  any,  although  fhe 
knew  them  a[d]verfe  to  her  Religion  (and  in  her  Sifters 
time  perverfe  towards  her  perfon)  and  private  to  her 
troubles  and  imprifonment ;  A  prudence  which  was 
incompatible  with  her  Sifters  nature,  for  fhe  both 
diffipated  and  perfecuted  the  major  part  of  her 
Brothers  Councel.  But  this  will  be  of  certainty,  that 
how  compilable  foever  and  obfequious  fhe  found  them, 
yet  for  a  good  fpace  fhe  made  little  ufe  of  their  Coun- 
fels,  more  than  in  the  ordinary  courfe  of  the  Board, 
for  fhe  held  a  dormant  Table  in  her  own  Princely 
breaft  :  yet  (he  kept  them  together,  and  their  places, 
without  any  fudden  change  :  fo  that  we  may  fay  of 
them,  That  they  were  of  the  Court,  not  of  the  Coun- 
fell.  For  whileft  fhe  amazed  them  with  a  kind  of  pro- 
miffive  difputation  concerning  the  points  controverted 
by  both  Churches,  fhe  did  fet  down  her  own  referva- 
tions  without  their  privity,  and  made  all  her  progref- 
fions  gradations.  But  fo,  that  the  tenents  [tents  ?]  of  her 
fecrecy,  with  intent  of  her  eflablifhment,  were  pitcht 
before  it  was  known  where  the  Court  would  fit  down. 
Neither  doe  I  find,  that  any  of  her  Sifters  Councel  of 
State  were  either  repugnant  to  her  Religion,  or  oppofed 


Favoicritcs.  25 

her  doings  {Etiglefidd  Mafler  of  the  Horfe  excepted, 
who  withdrew  himfelf  from  the  Board,  and  fliortly  after 
from  out  her  Dominions)  fo  plyable  and  obedient  they 
were  to  change  with  the  times,  and  their  Princes. 
And  of  this  there  will  fall  in  here  a  relation  both  of 
recreation,  and  of  known  truth. 

Paiilet  Marqueffe  of  WincheJJer^  and  Lord  Treafurer, 
having  ferved  then  four  Princes  in  as  various  and 
changeable  feafon,  that  I  may  well  fay,  time  nor  any 
age  hath  yielded  the  like  prefident.  This  man  bemg 
noted  to  grow  high  in  her  favour  (as  his  place  and  ex- 
perience required)  was  queflioned  by  an  intimate 
friend  of  his,  how  he  flood  up  for  thirty  years  together, 
amidil  the  changes  and  raignes  of  fo  many  Chan- 
cellors and  great  Perfonages  ;  Why,  quoth  the  Mar- 
(jueffe,  Ortiis  fitin  ex  fa/ice,  iioji  ex  querai,  I  was  made 
of  the  plyable  Willow,  not  of  the  flubborn  Oak.  And 
truly  the  old  man  hath  taught  them  all,  efpecially 
IVilliatn  Earl  of  Fenib^'oke,  for  they  two  were  ever  of 
the  Kings  Religion,  and  over-zealous  profeffors.  Of 
thefe  it  is  faid,  that  being  both  younger  Brothers  (yet 
of  Noble  Houfes)  they  fpent  what  was  left  them,  and 
came  on  trufl  to  the  Court ;  where  upon  the  bare 
flock  of  their  W'its  they  began  to  trafftck  for  them- 
felves  and  profpered  fo  well,  that  they  got,  fpent,  and 
left  more  than  any  Subjects  from  the  Norman  Con- 
quefl  to  their  own  times  :  whereunto  it  hath  been 
prettily  replyed,  that  they  lived  in  a  time  of  diffolu- 
tion. 

To  conclude  then,  of  any  of  the  former  raign,  it  is 
faid,  that  thefe  two  lived  and  dyed  chiefly  in  her 
favour.  The  latter,  upon  his  fonnes  mariage  with  the 
Lady  Katherine  Grey  was  like  utterly  to  have  lofl  him- 
felf :  But  at  the  inRant  of  the  confummation,  apprehend- 
ing the  infafety  and  danger  of  an  inter-mariage  with 
the  Bloud-Royall,  he  fell  at  the  Queens  feet,  where  he 
both  acknowledged  his  prefumption  with  teares,  and 
projected  the  caufe  and  the  divorce  together ;  and  fo 
quick  he  was  at  his  work,  (for  it  flood  him  upon)  that 


2  6  Queen  Elizabeth's 

upon  repudiation  of  the  Lady,  he  clapt  up  a  marriage 
for  his  Son  the  Lord  Herbe^-t,  with  Mary  Sidney 
daughter  to  Sir  Henry  Sidney^  then  Lord  Deputy  of 
Ireland  \  the  blow  falHng  on  Edward  late  Earl  of 
Hereford^  who  to  his  cofL  took  up  the  divorced  Lady, 
of  whom  the  Lord  Beauchamp  was  born,  and  l^  illiani 
Earl  of  Hereford  is  defcended.  I  come  now  to  pre- 
fent  thofe  of  her  own  Ele6lion,  which  fhe  either  ad- 
mitted to  her  fecrets  of  State,  or  took  into  her  grace 
and  favour :  of  whom,  in  their  order,  I  crave  leave  to 
give  unto  poderity  a  cautious  defcription,  with  a  fliort 
Charadler  or  draught  of  the  perfons  themfelves.  For 
without  offence  to  others,  I  would  be  true  to  my  felf, 
their  memories  and  merits  diftinguifhing  them  of  the 
Militia  from  the  To^ati  ;  and  of  thefe  fhe  had  as  many 
and  thofe  as  able  Miniflers,  as  any  of  her  Progenitors. 

Leicefter. 

iT  will  be  out  of  doubt,  that  my  Lord  oi Leicc- 
Jler  was  one  of  the  firfL  whom  flie  made 
Mafter  of  the  Horfe  :  he  was  the  youngefl 
Sonne  then  living  of  the  Duke  oi  Northum- 
berland, beheaded/;'/;;?^  MaiHcE\  and  his 
Father  was  that  Dudley,yN\i\<:h  our  Hiftories  couple  with 
Empfon ;  and  both  fo  much  infamed  for  the  Caterpillars 
of  the  Common-wealth,  during  the  reign  of  Henry  the 
feventh,who  being  of  a  Noble  extra6l,was  executed  the 
firft  year  oi  Henry  the  eight :  but  not  thereby  fo  extindl, 
but  that  he  left  a  plentiful  Eftate,  and  fuch  a  Son, 
who,  as  the  vulgar  fpeaks  it,  could  live  without  the 
teat ;  for  out  of  the  afhes  of  his  Fathers  infamie,  he 
rofe  to  be  a  Duke,  and  as  high,  as  fubje(Slion  could 
permit,  or  Soveraignty  endure ;  and  though  he  could 
not  find  out  any  appellation  to  affume  the  Crown  in 
his  own  Perfon,  yet  he  proje(5led,  and  very  neerly 
effected  it  for  his  Son  Gilbert,  by  inter-marriage  with 
the   Lady  lane  Grey,  and  fo  by  that  way  to  bring  it 


%\ 


Favourites.  27 

about  into  his  loyncs.  Obfervation?,  which  though 
they  He  behind  us,  and  feem  impertinent  to  the  Text, 
yet  are  they  not  much  extravagant  :  for  they  mufl. 
lead,  and  fhew  us  how  the  after-paflages  were  brought 
about  with  the  dependances,  and  on  the  hinges  of  a 
collateral!  workmanHiip :  and  truly,  it  Inay  amaze 
a  well  fetled  judgement,  to  look  back  into  thofe 
times,  and  to  conlkler  how  this  Duke  could  attain  to 
fuch  a  pilch  of  greatneffe;  his  Father  dying  in  igno- 
minie,  and  at  the  Gallows,  his  Eflate  confifcate,  and 
that  for  peeling  and  polling,  by  the  clamour,  and  cru- 
cifige  of  the  people  ;  but  when  we  better  think  upon 
it,  we  find  that  he  was  given  up,  but  as  a  Sacrifice  to 
pleafe  the  people,  not  for  any  oftence  committed 
againfl  the  perfon  of  the  King  ;  fo  that  upon  the 
matter  he  was  a  Martyr  of  the  Prerogative,  and  the 
King  in  honour  could  doe  no  leffe,  than  give  back  to 
his  Son  the  priviledges  of  his  bloud,  with  the  acquir- 
ings  of  his  Fathers  profeffion,  for  he  was  a  Lawyer, 
and  of  the  Kings  Counfels  at  Law,  before  he  came  to 
be  ex  interioribus  confiliis^  where  befides  the  licking  of 
his  own  fingers,  he  got  the  King  a  maffe  of  riches, 
and  that  not  with  the  hazard,  but  the  loffe  of  his  fame 
and  life  for  the  Kings  Fathers  fake.  Certain  it  is, 
that  his  fonne  was  left  rich  in  purfe  and  brain,  which 
are  good  foundations,  and  full  to  ambition  ;  and  it 
may  be  fuppofed,  he  w^as  on  all  occafions  well  heard 
of  the  King,  as  a  perfon  of  mark  and  compaffion  in 
his  eye:  but  I  find  not  that  he  did  put  up  for  advance- 
ment, during  Henry  the  eights  time,  although  a  vafl 
afpirer,  and  provident  Rorer.  It  feems  he  thought 
the  Kings  reign  was  given  to  the  fallmg  fickneffe  :  but 
efpying  his  time  fitting,  and  the  Soveraignty  in  the 
hands  of  a  pupil  Prince,  he  thought  he  might  as  well 
then  put  up  for  it  as  the  befl,  for  having  then  poffef- 
fion  of  bloud,  and  a  purfe,  with  a  head-piece  of  a  vafl 
extent,  he  foon  got  honour,  and  no  foonei  there,  but 
he  began  to  fide  it  with  the  befl,  even  with  the  Pro- 
tector, and  in  conclufion  got  his,   and   his  Brothers 


28  Queen  Ellzabeth*s 

heads ;  flill  afpiring,  till  he  expired,  in  the  loffe  of  his 
own  :  fo  that  pofterity  may  by  reading  the  Father  and 
Grandfather,  make  judgement  of  the  Son  ;  for  we 
fhall  find,  that  this  Robei'-t  (whofe  originall  we  have 
now  traced,  the  better  to  prefent  him)  was  inheritor  of 
the  genius  and  craft  of  his  Father,  and  Ambi^ofe  of  the 
eflate,  of  whom  hereafter  we  fhall  make  fome  fliort 
mention. 

We  take  him  now  as  he  was  admitted  into  the 
Court,  and  the  Queens  favour,  where  he  was  not  to 
feek  to  play  his  part  well,  and  dexterioufly.  But  his 
play  v/as  chiefly  at  the  fore-game  ;  not  that  he  was  a 
learner  at  the  latter,  but  he  loved  not  the  after-wit,  for 
they  report  (and  I  think  not  untruly)  that  he  was 
feldome  behind  hand  with  his  Gameflers,  and  that 
they  alwayes  went  away  with  the  loffe. 

He  was  a  very  goodly  perfon,  and  fmgular  well 
featured,  and  all  his  youth  well  favoured,  and  of  a 
fweet  afpecSl,  but  high-foreheaded,  which  as  I  lliould 
take  it,  was  of  no  difcommendation  :  but  towards  his 
latter  end  (which  with  old  men,  was  but  a  middle  age) 
he  grew  high-coloured  and  red-faced.  So  that  the 
Queen  in  this,  had  much  of  her  Father,  for  (excepting 
fome  of  her  kindred,  and  fome  few  that  had  handfome 
wits  in  crooked  bodies)  fhe  alwayes  took  perfonage  in 
the  way  of  her  ele(!:tion ;  for  the  people  hath  it  to  this 
day  in  proverb.  King  Harry  loved  a  man.  Being  thus 
in  her  grace,  iTie  called  to  mind  the  fufferings  of  his 
Anceftors,  both  in  her  Fathers  and  fiflers  reigns,  and 
reftored  his  and  his  brothers  bloud,  creating  A?nbrofe, 
the  elder,  Earl  of  Warwick,  and  himfelf  Earl  of  Lei- 
cejier.  etc.  And  he  was  ex  primitiis,  or  of  her  firfl 
choice  ;  for  he  refled  not  there,  but  long  enjoyed  her 
favour  :  and  therewith  much  what  he  lifted,  till  time 
and  emulation  (the  companions  of  great  ones)  had 
refolved  on  his  period,  and  to  cover  him  at  his  fetting 
in  a  cloud  at  Cor?ibury,  not  by  fo  violent  a  death,  and 
by  the  fatall  fentence  of  Judicature,  as  that  of  his 
P'athers  and  Grandfathers  was  ;  but  as  it  is  fuggefted, 


Favourites.  29 

by  that  poyfon  which  lie  had  prepared  for  others, 
wherein  they  report  him  a  rare  Artifl.  I  am  not 
bound  to  give  credit  to  all  vulgar  relations,  or  to  the 
libels  of  the  times,  which  are  commonly  forced,  and 
falfihed  fuitable  to  the  moods  and  humours  of  men  in 
paffion  and  difcontent :  But  that  which  leads  me  to 
think  him  no  good  man,  is  amongfl  others  of  known 
truth,  that  of  my  Lord  of  Effex  death  in  Ireland,  and 
the  marriage  of  his  Lady  yet  living,  which  I  forbear  to 
preffe,  in  regard  that  he  is  long  fmce  dead,  and  others 
living  whom  it  may  concern. 

To  take  him  in  the  obfervations  of  his  Letters  and 
Writings  (which  Hiould  befl  fet  him  off)  for  fuch  as 
fell  into  my  hands,  I  never  yet  faw  a  flyle  or  phrafe 
more  feeming  religious,  and  fuller  of  the  llreames  of 
devotion  ;  and  were  they  not  fmcere,  I  doubt  much 
of  his  well-being;  and  I  may  fear  he  was  too  well  feen 
in  the  Aphorifnies  and  principles  of  NicJiolas  the 
F/orentuie,  and  in  the  reaches  of  Ccefar  Borgia.  Hi- 
therto I  have  touched  him  in  his  CourtHiip;  I  con- 
clude him  in  his  Lance.  He  was  fent  Governour  by 
the  Queen  to  the  United  States  oi  Holland ;  where  we 
read  not  of  his  wonders ;  for  they  fay  that  he  had 
more  of  Mercury  than  of  Mars ;  and  that  his  device 
might  have  been,  without  prejudice  to  the  Great  Ccsfar, 
Vcni,  2'idi,  redii. 

Siijfex. 

ils  Corrivall  before  mentioned,  was  Thomas 
RadcUffe  Earl  of  Suffex,  who  in  his  con- 
flellation  was  his  direct  oppofite ;  for  he 
was  indeed  one  of  the  Queens  Alartialifls, 
and  did  very  good  fervice  in  Ireland  at 
her  firft  acceffion,  till  flie  recalled  him  to  the  Court, 
where  Hie  made  him  Lord  Chamberlain)  but  he  played 
not  his  game  with  that  cunning  and  dexterity  as  Lei- 
cejltr  did,  who  was  much  the  more  facete  Courtier, 
though  SuJJex  was  thought  much  the  honefler  man,  and 
far  the  better  fouldier:  but  he  lay  too  open  on  his  guard. 


30  Queen  Elizabeth's 

He  was  a  goodly  Gentleman,  and  of  a  brave  Noble 
nature,  true  and  conflant  to  his  friends  and  fervants : 
He  was  alfo  of  a  very  Noble  and  ancient  lineage, 
honoured  through  many  defcents  by  the  title  ofVif- 
counts  Fitzwalters.  Moreover  there  was  fuch  an 
Antipathy  in  his  nature  to  that  of  Leicejiers^  that  being 
together  in  Court,  and  both  in  high  imployments, 
they  grew  to  a  direcfl  frowardneffe,  and  were  in  con- 
tinual oppofition  ;  the  one  fetting  the  watch,  the  other 
the  fentinell,  each  on  the  others  a6lions  and  motions ; 
for  my  Lord  of  Suffex  was  of  a  great  fpirit,  which 
backt  with  the  Queens  fpeciall  favour,  and  fupported 
by  a  great  and  ancient  inheritance,  could  not  brook  the 
others  Empire  :  Infomuch  as  the  Queen  upon  fundry 
occafions  had  fomewhat  to  doe  to  appeafe  and  attain 
them,  untill  death  parted  the  competition,  and  left  the 
place  to  Leicejler^  who  was  not  long  alone  without  his 
rivall  in  grace  and  command.  And  to  conclude  this 
Favourite  :  it  is  confidently  affirmed,  that  lying  in  his 
lafl  fickneffe,  he  gave  this  caveat  to  his  Friends  :  I 
am  now  paffmg  into  another  world,  and  I  muft  now 
leave  you  to  your  Fortunes,  and  to  the  Queens  grace 
and  goodneffe  :  but  beware  of  the  Gipfie,  meaning 
Leicejler,  for  he  will  be  too  hard  for  you  all,  you  know 
not  the  beafl  fo  well  as  I  do. 

Lord  Btirleigh, 

Now  come  to  the  next,  which  was  Secretary 
William  Cecil)  For  on  the  death  of  the 
old  Marquefs  of  Winchejler^  he  came  up 
in  his  room.  A  perfon  of  a  mofl  fubtile 
and  active  fpirit,  who  though  he  flood 
not  altogether  by  the  way  of  conflellation  and  making 
up  of  a  part  and  fa61ion,  for  he  was  wholly  intentive 
to  the  fervice  of  his  Miflris,  and  his  dexterity,  experi- 
ence, and  merit  challenged  a  room  in  the  Queens 
favour,  which  eclipfed  the  others  over-feeming  great- 
neffe,  and  made  it  appear,  that  there  were  others  that 
fleered  and  flood  at  the  Helm  befides  himfelf,  and 


Favourites.  3 1 

more  Starres  in  the  Firmament  of  her  grace  than  Vrfa 
major ^  or  the  Bear  with  the  ragged  flaffe. 

He  was  born,  as  they  fay,  in  Lincohijliire ;  but  as 
fome  upon  knowledge  aveiTe,  of  a  younger  Brother  ot 
the  Cecils  of  HariJordJIiire^  a  family  (of  mine  own 
knowledge)  though  now  private,  yet  of  no  mean  an- 
tiquity. Who  being  expofcd,  and  fent  to  the  City,  as 
poor  Gentlemen  ufe  to  do  their  younger  Sons,  he 
came  to  be  a  rich  man  on  Londoji  briuge ;  and  pur- 
chafmg  in  Lificoljijliire^  where  this  man  was  born,  he 
was  fent  to  Cambridge^  then  to  the  Junes  of  Court, 
and  fo  he  came  to  ferve  the  Duke  of  Soininerfet  in  the 
time  of  his  Proteclorfliip  as  Secretary ;  and  having  a 
pregnancy  to  great  inclinations,  he  came  by  degrees 
to  a  higher  converfation  with  the  chiefell  affairs  of 
State  and  Councels  :  but  on  the  fall  of  the  Duke  he 
flood  fome  yeers  in  umbrage,  and  without  imploy- 
ment,  till  the  State  found  and  needed  his  abilities : 
and  though  we  find  not  that  he  was  taken  into  any 
place,  during  Maries  raign,  unleffe  (as  fome  have  faid) 
towards  the  lafl ;  yet  the  Councel  on  feverall  occa- 
fions  made  ufe  of  him,  and  at  the  Queens  entrance  he 
was  admitted  Secretary  of  State,  afterwards  he  was 
made  Mafler  of  the  Court  of  Wards,  then  Lord  Trea- 
furer  :  A  perfon  of  mofl  exquifite  abilities.  And  in- 
deed the  Queen  began  then  to  need,  and  to  feek  out 
for  men  of  both  Garbs,  and  fo  I  conclude,  and  rank 
this  great  Inflrument  of  State  amongfl.  the  Togati,  for 
he  had  not  to  doe  with  the  Sword,  more  than  as  the 
great  Pay-mafler,  and  Contriver  of  Warre,  which 
Ihortly  followed,  wherein  he  accompliflied  much 
through  his  Theoricall  knowledge  at  home,  and  in- 
telligence abroad,  by  unlocking  the  Councels  of  the 
Queens  enemies. 

We  mufl  now  take  (and  that  of  truth)  into  obferva- 
tion.  That  untill  the  tenth  of  her  reign  her  times  were 
calm  and  ferene,  though  fometimes  a  little  over-cafl, 
as  the  mofl  glorious  Sun-rifmgs  are  fubjedl  to  fliadow- 
ings  and  droppings  in.  For  the  clouds  of  Spain,  and 
vapours  of  the  Holy  League,  began  then  to  difperfe 


32  Queen  Elizabeth's 

and  threaten  her  ferenity ;  Moreover  fhe  was  then  to 
provide  againft  fome  intefline  (lormes,  which  began  to 
gather  in  the  very  heart  of  her  Kingdorae  ;  all  which 
had  a  relation  and  correfpondencie  each  with  other, 
to  dethrone  her,  and  to  diflurbe  the  publike  tran- 
quillity, and  therewithall  (as  a  principall  work)  the 
eflablilhed  Religion  ;  for  the  name  of  Recufant  began 
then,  and  firft  to  be  known  to  the  world,  and  till  then 
the  Catholiques  were  no  more  than  Church  Papifts  ; 
but  were  commanded  by  the  Popes  exprefs  Letters  to 
appear,  and  forbear  Church-going,  as  they  tender  their 
holy  Father,  and  the  holy  Catholique  Church  their 
Mother  :  fo  that  it  feems  the  Pope  had  then  his  aimes 
to  take  a  true  mufler  of  his  children  ;  but  the  Queen 
had  the  greater  advantage,  for  ihe  likewife  took  tale  of 
her  apofLate  Subje6ls,  their  ftrength,  and  how  many 
they  were  that  had  given  up  their  names  unto  Baal. 
He  then  by  the  hands  of  fome  of  his  Profelytes,  fixed 
his  Bulls  on  the  Gates  of  Pauls,  which  difcharged  her 
Subje6ts  of  all  fidelity,  and  laid  fiege  to  the  received 
faith,  and  fo  under  the  vail  of  the  next  Succeffor,  to 
replant  the  Catholique  Religion ;  fo  that  the  Queen 
had  then  a  new  task  and  work  in  hand,  that  might 
well  awake  her  beft  providence,  and  required  a  mufler 
of  men  and  Armes,  as  well  as  Courtfliips  and  Coun- 
cels  ;  for  the  times  began  to  be  quick  and  a6live,  and 
fitter  for  flronger  motions,  than  thofe  of  the  Carpet ; 
and  it  will  be  a  true  note  of  her  magnanimity,  that 
file  loved  a  Souldier,  and  had  a  propenfion  in  her 
nature  to  regard,  and  alwayes  to  grace  them  :  which 
the  Courtiers  taking  into  obfervation,  took  it  as  an  in- 
vitation to  win  honour,  together  with  her  Majeflies 
favour,  by  expofing  themfelves  to  the  Warres  ;  efpe- 
cially,  when  the  Queens  and  the  affairs  of  the  King- 
dome  flood  in  fome  neceffity  of  a  Souldier  :  For  we 
have  many  inflances  of  the  Sallies  of  the  Nobility  and 
Gentry  :  yea,  and  out  of  the  Court,  and  her  privy 
Favourites  (that  had  any  touch  or  tincture  of  Mais  in 
tlieir  inclinations)  and  to  fleal  away  without  Licenfe, 
and  the  Queens  privity,  which  had  like  to  have  cofl 


Favourites.  33 

fome  of  them  dear;  fo  predominant  were  their  thoughts 
and  hopes  of  honour  growing  in  them  ;  as  we  may 
truly  obferve  in  the  difpofitions  of  Sir  Philip  Sidney, 
my  Lord  of  Effex,  Mountjoy,  and  divers  others,  whofe 
abfence,  and  the  manner  of  their  eruptions  was  very 
diftaflefull  to  her  :  whereof  I  can  here  adde  a  true 
and  no  impertinent  flory,  and  that  of  the  lafl  Mou/it- 
joy\  who  having  twice  or  thrice  floln  away  into  Britain 
(where  under  Sir  loJui  Norris  he  had  then  a  Company) 
without  the  Queens  leave  and  privity ;  flie  fent  a 
Meffcnger  unto  him,  with  a  flri6l  charge  to  the  Ge- 
nerall  to  fee  him  fent  home  :  when  he  came  into  the 
Queens  prefence,  fhe  fell  into  a  kind  of  reviling,  de- 
manding how  he  durfl  goe  over  without  her  leave ; 
Serve  me  fo  (quoth  flie)  once  more,  and  I  will  lay  you 
fafl  enough  for  running ;  You  will  never  leave  it  until! 
you  are  knockt  on  the  head,  as  that  inconfiderate 
fellow  Sidney  was ;  You  fliall  go  when  I  fend  you,  in 
the  mean  time  fee  that  you  lodge  in  the  Court  (which 
was  then  at  White-hall)  where  you  may  follow  your 
Book,  read  and  difcourfe  of  the  Wars. 

But  to  our  purpofe  :  It  fell  out  happily  to  thofe,  and 
(as  I  may  fay)  to  thofe  times,  That  the  Queen,  during 
the  calm  of  her  Reign,  was  not  idle,  nor  rockt  afleep 
with  fecurity  ;  for  flie  had  been  very  provident  in  the 
Reparation  and  Augmentation  of  her  Shipping  and 
Ammunition  :  and  1  know  not  whether  by  a  fore-fight 
of  policy,  or  an  inflinct,  it  came  about,  or  whether  it 
was  an  acl  of  her  compaffion  ;  but  it  is  mofl  certain, 
That  Hie  fent  Levies,  and  no  fmall  Troops  to  the 
affiflance  of  the  revolted  States  of  Holland,  Ijefore  fhe 
had  received  any  affront  from  the  King  of  Spain,  that 
might  deferve,  or  tend  to  a  breach  in  HoRility;  which 
the  Papifls  to  this  day  maintain,  was  the  provocation 
and  caufe  of  the  after-wars  :  but  omitting  what  might 
be  faid  to  this  point,  thofe  Netherland  wars  were  the 
Queens  Seminaries,  and  the  Nurferies  of  very  many 
brave  Souldiers  ;  and  fo  were  likewife  the  Civill  wars 
of  France  (whither  fhe  fent  five  feverall  Armies)  the 
Fence-fchocls  that  inured  the  youth  and  Gallantry  of 


34  Queen  Elizabeth's 

the  Kingdom,  and  it  was  a  Militia  wherein  they  were 
daily  in  acquaintance  with  the  difcipUne  of  the  Spaniards y 
who  were  then  turned  the  Queens  inveterate  enemies. 

And  this  have  I  taken  into  obfervation  of  her  Dies 
Halcioiiii,  thofe  yeares  of  hers  which  were  more  ferene 
and  quiet  than  thofe  that  followed ;  which  though 
they  were  not  leffe  propitious,  as  being  touched  more 
with  the  point  of  honour  and  victory,  yet  were  they 
troubled,  and  ever  clouded  over  both  with  domeflique 
and  forraign  machinations  ;  and  it  is  already  quoted, 
they  were  fuch  as  awakened  her  fpirits,  and  made  her 
cafl  about  how  to  defend,  rather  by  offending,  and  by 
the  way  of  diverting  to  prevent  all  Invafions,  then  to 
expe6l  them,  which  was  a  piece  of  policy  of  the  times : 
and  with  this  I  have  noted  the  caufes  or  principia  of 
the  Warres  following,  and  like  wife  pointed  to  the  feed- 
plots  from  whence  flie  took  up  thofe  brave  men,  and 
plants  of  honour,  which  acfted  on  the  theatre  of  Mars, 
and  on  whom  flie  difperfed  the  rayes  of  her  grace, 
which  were  perfons  in  their  kindes  of  rare  vertues,  and 
fuch  as  might  (out  of  height  of  merit)  pretend  interefl 
to  her  favour ;  of  which  rank,  the  number  will  equall, 
if  not  exceed  that  of  the  Gown-men.  In  recount  of 
\yhom  I  proceed  with  Sir  Philip  Sidney. 

Sir  Philip  Sidney, 


|E  was  fonne  to  Sir  Henery  Sidney^  Lord 
Deputy  oi Ireland.,  and  Prefident  of  Wales; 
a  perfon  of  great  parts,  and  in  no  mean 
grace  with  the  Queen  ;  his  mother  was 
fifler  to  my  Lord  of  Zeiee/ler,  from  whence 
Ave  may  conjedlure,  how  the  Father  flood  up  in  the 
place  of  honour  and  imployment,  fo  that  his  defcent 
was  apparently  noble  on  both  fides  :  For  his  educa- 
tion, it  was  fuch  as  travell,  and  the  Univerfity  could 
afford,  or  his  Tutours  infufe;  for  after  an  incredible 
proficiency  in  all  the  fpecies  of  Learning ;  he  left  the 
Academicall  life,  for  that  of  the  Court,  whither  he 
came  by  his  LTncles  invitation,  famed  afore-hand  by  a 


Favour  itts.  35 

noble  report  of  his  accompliriimcnts,  which  together 
with  the  flate  of  his  perfon,  framed  by  a  naturall  pro- 
penfion  to  Armes,  he  foon  attra6ted  the  good  opinion 
of  all  men,  and  was  fo  highly  prized  in  the  good 
opinion  of  the  Queen,  tliat  flie  thought  the  Court 
deficient  without  him  :  And  whereas  (through  the 
fame  of  his  deferts)  he  was  in  the  elecftion  for  the 
Kingdom  of  Pole,  flie  refufed  to  further  his  advance- 
ment, not  out  of  emulation,  but  out  of  fear  to  lofe  the 
Jewell  of  her  times  :  He  married  the  daughter  and  fole 
heir  of  Sir  Francis  WalfingJiain,  then  Secretary  of 
State,  a  Lady  deflinated  to  the  Bed  of  honour,  who 
(after  his  deplorable  death  at  Zutphen  in  the  Nether- 
lands, where  he  was  Govern  our  of  FluJJiing  at  the 
time  of  his  Uncles  being  there)  was  married  to  my 
Lord  of  Effex,  and  fmce  his  death  to  my  Lord  of  Saint 
Albans,  all  perfons  of  the  fv/ord,  and  otherwife  of  great 
honour  and  vertue. 

They  have  a  very  quaint  and  facetious  figment  of 
him.  That  Mars  and  Mercury  fell  at  variance  whofc 
fervant  he  fliould  be.  And  there  is  an  Epigrainmijl 
that  faith,  that  Art  and  Nature  had  fpent  their  excel- 
lencies in  his  fafliioning  ;  and  fearing  they  fliould  not 
end  what  they  begun,  they  beRowed  him  on  Fortune, 
and  nature  flood  raufingj  and  amazed  to  behold  her 
own  work  ;  but  thefe  are  the  fi6lions  of  Poets. 

Certain  it  is,  He  was  a  noble  and  matchlefs  Gentle- 
men, and  it  may  be  juflly  faid  without  hyperboles  of 
fiction,  as  it  was  of  Cato  Uticenfis,  That  he  feemed  to 
be  born  to  that  onely  which  he  w^ent  about.  Verfatilis 
ingenii,  as  Plutarch  hath  it.  But  to  fpeak  more  of 
him,  were  to  make  him  leffe. 

Sir  Fr.  IValfmgham 

Tr  Francis  Walfingham  (as  we  have  faid) 
had  the  honour  to  be  Sir  Philip  Sidney's 
Father  in  law  :  He  was  a  Gentleman  (at 
firfl.)  of  a  good  houfe,  but  of  better  educa- 
tion,  and  from   the  L"^ni\'errity  travelled 


36  Qtceen  Elizabeth's 

for  the  refl  of  his  Learning.  He  was  doubtleffe  the 
befl  Linguifl  of  the  times,  but  knew  befl  how  to  ufe 
his  own  tongue,  whereby  he  came  to  be  employed  in 
the  cliiefefl  affaires  of  State.  He  was  fent  Ambaffa- 
dour  into  France^  and  flayed  there  a  Lieger  long,  in 
the  heat  of  the  civill  warres,  and  at  the  fame  time  that 
Mounfier  was  here  a  Suitor  to  the  Queen  ;  and,  if  I 
be  not  miflaken,  he  played  the  very  fame  part  there, 
as  fmce  Gwidamore  did  here  :  At  his  return,  he  was 
taken  principal  Secretary,  and  was  one  of  the  great 
Engines  of  State,  and  of  the  times,  high  in  the  Queens 
favour,  and  a  watchful  fervant  over  the  fafety  of  his 
Miflreffe. 

They  note  him  to  have  had  certain  curiofities,  and 
fecret  wayes  of  intelligence  above  the  reft :  But  I 
muft  confeffe  I  am  to  feek  wherefore  he  fuffered  Parry 
to  play  fo  long  on  the  hook,  before  he  hoyfed  him  up; 
and  I  have  been  a  little  curious  in  the  fearch  thereof, 
though  I  have  not  to  doe  with  the  Arcana  I?nperii. 
For  to  know  is  fometimes  a  burthen;  and  I  remember 
that  it  was  OvicTs  crimen  aut  error,  That  he  faw  too 
much.  But  I  hope  thefe  are  Collaterals  of  no  danger. 
But  that  Parry  intending  to  kill  the  Queen,  made  the 
way  of  his  acceffe  by  betraying  of  others,  and  im- 
peaching of  the  PriefLs  of  his  own  correfpondency, 
and  thereby  had  acceffe  and  conference  with  the 
Queen,  and  alfo  oftentimes  familiar  and  private  con- 
ference with  Walfingham^  will  not  be  the  Quaere  of 
the  myftery ;  for  the  Secretary  might  have  had  end  of 
difcovery  on  a  further  maturity  of  the  Treafon :  but 
that  after  the  Queen  knew  Parries  intent,  why  flie 
fhould  then  admit  him  to  private  difcourfe,  and  IVal- 
fin^ham  to  fuffer  it,  confidering  the  condition  of  all  af- 
failings,  and  permit  him  to  go  where  and  whither  he 
lifted,  and  onely  on  the  fecurity  of  a  dark  fentinell  fet 
over  him,  was  a  piece  of  reach  and  hazard  beyond  my 
apprehenfion. 

I  muft  again  profeffe,  That  having  read  many  of  his 
Letters  (for  they  are  commonly  fent  to  my  Lord  of 
LeiceJIer,  and  Burleigh,  out  of  France)  containing  many 


Favourites.  37 

fine  palTages  and  fecrets ;  yet  if  I  might  have  been 
beholding  to  his  Cyphers,  whereof  they  are  full,  they 
would  have  told  pretty  tales  of  the  times.  But  I  mufl. 
now  clofe  up,  and  rank  him  amongft  the  Togati,  yet 
chief  of  thofe  that  laid  the  foundation  of  the  Dutch 
and  Frcfic/i  wars,  which  was  another  piece  of  his  fine- 
neffe,  and  of  the  times  ;  with  one  obfervation  more, 
That  he  was  one  of  the  great  allayes  of  the  Auflerian 
embracements  :  For  both  himfelf,  and  Stafford  that 
preceded  him,  might  well  have  been  compared  to  the 
fiend  in  the  Gofpel,  that  fowed  his  tares  in  the  night ; 
fo  did  they  their  feeds  of  divifion  in  the  dark.  And  it 
is  a  likely  report  that  they  father  on  him,  at  his  return, 
That  he  faid  unto  the  Queen,  with  fome  fenfibility  of 
the  Spanifh  defigns  on  France:  Madam,  I  befeech 
you  be  content  not  to  fear ;  The  Spaniard  hath  a 
great  appetite,  and  an  excellent  digeflion,  but  I  have 
fitted  him  with  a  bone  for  this  twenty  yeares,  that 
your  Majefly  fhall  have  no  caufe  to  doubt  him  \  por- 
vided  that  if  the  fire  chance  to  flack  which  I  have 
kindled,  you  will  be  ruled  by  me,  and  now  and  then 
cafl  in  fome  Englifh  fewel,  which  will  revive  the  flame. 

Willotighby. 

[Y  Lord  Willoughby  was  one  of  the  Queens 
firfl  Sword-men  :  He  was  of  the  ancient 
extra6t  of  the  Bartues^  but  more  ennobled 
by  his  mother,  who  was  Dutcheffe  of 
Suffolk. 

He  was  a  great  Mafler  of  the  Art  Military,  and  was 
fent  Generall  into  France.,  and  commanded  the  fecond 
of  five  Armies  that  the  Queen  fent  thither  in  aid  of 
the  French.  I  have  heard  it  fpoken,  that  had  he  not 
flighted  the  Court,  but  applyed  himfelf  to  the  Queen, 
he  might  have  enjoyed  a  plentifull  portion  of  her 
grace:  And  it  was  his  faying,  (and  it  did  him  no  good) 
'I'hat  he  was  none  of  the  Feptiiia,  intimating,  that  he 
could  not  creep  on  the  ground,  and  that  the  Court 
was  not  in  his  Element ;  for  indeed,  as  he  was  a  great 


1 

m 
a 

^S 

38  Queeit  Elizabeth's 

Souldier,  fo  was  he  of  a  fuitable  magnanimity,  and 
could  not  brook  the  obfequioufnelTe  and  affiduity  of 
the  Court ;  and  as  he  tlien  was  fomewhat  defcending 
from  youth,  happily  he  had  an  a?iwiam  reverte?idi,  and 
to  make  a  fafe  retreat. 

Sir  Nic.  Bacon. 

Come  to  another  of  the  Togafl,  Sir  Nicholas 
Bacon,  An  arch-piece  of  Wit  and  Wifdom. 
He  was  a  Gentleman,  and  a  man  of  Law, 
and  of  great  knowledge  therein;  whereby, 
together  with  his  other  parts  of  learning 
and  dexterity,  he  was  promoted  to  be  Keeper  of  the 
Great  Seal :  and  being  of  kin  to  the  Treafurer  Bur- 
high,  had  alfo  the  help  of  his  hand  to  bring  him  into 
the  Queens  favour ;  for  he  was  abundantly  fa6lious, 
which  took  much  with  the  Queen,  when  it  was  fuited 
with  the  feafon,  as  he  was  well  able  to  judge  of  his 
times.  He  had  a  very  quaint  faying,  and  he  ufed  it 
often  to  good  purpofe  ;  That  he  loved  the  jefl  well, 
but  not  the  loffe  of  his  friend.  He  would  fay,  That 
though  he  knew,  Unuf quif que  fucB  fortunes  faher,  was  a 
true  and  good  principle  ;  yet  the  moft  in  number  were 
thofe  that  marred  themfelves.  But  I  will  never  for- 
give that  man,  that  lofeth  himfelf,  to  be  rid  of  his  jefl. 

He  was  father  to  that  Refined  Wit,  which  fmce  hath 
a6led  a  difaftrous  part  on  the  publique  flage.  and  of 
late  fate  in  his  Fathers  room  as  Lord  Chancellor. 
Thofe  that  lived  in  his  age,  and  from  whence  I  have 
taken  this  little  Modell  of  him,  give  him  a  lively 
Character  ;  and  they  decipher  him  for  another  Solon, 
and  the  Synon  of  thofe  times,  fuch  a  one  as  Oedipus 
was  in  diffolving  of  Riddles.  Doubtleffe  he  was  as 
able  an  InfLrument ;  and  it  was  his  commendation, 
that  his  head  was  the  Mawl  (for  it  was  a  great  one) 
and  therein  he  kept  the  Wedge  that  entred  die  knotty 
pieces  that  came  to  the  Table.  And  now  I  mufl 
again  fall  back  to  fmooth  and  plain  a  way  to  the  refl 
that  is  behind,  but  not  from  the  purpofe. 


FavoiC7'itcs.  39 

There  were  about  thcfe  times  two  Rivals  in  the 
Queens  favour ;  Old  Sir  Fraticis  Knowls  Controller  of 
the  Houfe,  and  ^\x  Henry  Norris^  whom  Hie  called  up 
at  a  Parliament  to  fit  with  the  Peers  in  the  higher 
Houfe,  as  Lord  Norris  of  I^icof^  who  had  married  the 
daughter  and  heir  of  the  old  L.  Williains  of  Tame^  a 
Noble  perfon,  and  to  whom  in  the  Queens  adverfity 
fhe  had  been  committed  to  fafe  cuRody,  and  from  him 
had  received  more  than  ordinary  obfervances.  Now 
fuch  was  the  goodneffe  of  the  Queens  nature,  that  fhe 
neither  forgot  good  turns  received  from  the  Lord 
Williams,  neither  was  flie  unmindfull  of  this  Lord 
Norris,  whofe  Father,  in  her  Fathers  time,  and  in  the 
bufineffe  of  her  Mother,  dyed  in  a  Noble  caufe,  and  in 
the  juflification  of  her  innocencie. 

Lord  Norris. 


m 

[Y  Lord  Norris  had  by  this  Lady  an  ample 
Iffue,  which  the  Queen  highly  refpected  : 
for  he  had  fix  Sonnes,  and  all  Martiall 
brave  men  :  The  firfl  was  William  his 
eldefl,  and  Father  to  the  late  Earl  of 
Berkjliire ;  Sir  John,  vulgarly  called  Generall  Norris  ; 
Sir  Edward,  Sir  Thomas,  Sir  Henry,  and  Alaximiliaji ; 
Men  of  an  haughty  courage,  and  of  great  experience 
in  the  condud^t  of  Military  affaires :  And  to  fpeak  in 
the  Chara6ler  of  their  merit,  they  were  perfons  of  fuch 
renown  and  worth,  as  future  times  muft  out  of  duty 
owe  them  the  debt  of  an  honourable  memory. 

Kiiowls. 

[Ir  Francis  Knowls  was  fomewhat  of  the 
Queens  affinity,  and  had  likewife  no  in- 
competent Iffue  ;  for  he  had  alfo  William 
his  eldefl,  and  fince  ^K,arl  of  Banbury,  Sir 
Thomas,  Sir  Robert,  and  Sir  Francis ;  if  I 

be  not  a  little  miflaken  in  their  names  and  martialling; 

and  there  was  alfo  the  Lady  Lcltice,  a  Sifler  of  thcfe, 


40  Queen  Elizabeth's 

who  was  firfl  Counteffe  of  EJfex^  and  after  of  Leicejler. 
And  thefe  were  alfo  brave  men  in  their  times  and 
places ;  but  they  were  of  the  Court  and  Carpet,  not 
led  by  the  genius  of  the  Camp. 

Between  thefe  two  Families,  there  was  (as  it  falleth 
out  amongft  Great  ones,  and  Competitors  for  favour) 
no  great  correfpondencie :  and  there  were  fome  feeds, 
either  of  emulation  or  dillrufl  cafL  between  them,  which 
had  not  been  disjoyned  in  the  refidence  of  their  per- 
fons,  (as  it  was  the  fortune  of  their  imployments,  the 
one  fide  attending  the  Court,  the  other  the  Pavilion) 
furely  they  would  have  broken  out  into  fome  kind  of 
hoftility,  or  at  leafl  they  would  have  wreflled  one  in 
the  other,  like  Trees  incircled  with  ivy  :  For  there  was 
a  time  when  (both  thefe  Fraternities  being  met  at 
Court)  there  paffed  a  challenge  between  them  at  cer- 
tain exercifes,  the  Queen  and  the  old  men  being 
fpedlators,  which  ended  in  a  flat  quarrell  amongfl 
them  all.  And  I  am  perfwaded  (though  I  ought  not 
to  judge)  that  there  were  fome  rehques  of  this  feud, 
that  were  long  after  the  caufes  of  the  one  Families 
(almofl  utter)  extirpation,  and  of  the  others  improf- 
perity  For  it  was  a  known  truth,  that  fo  long  as  my 
Lord  of  Leicejler  lived,  who  was  the  main  pillar  of  the 
one  fide,  as  having  married  the  Sifter,  none  of  the 
other  fide  took  any  deep  rooting  in  the  Court,  though 
otherwife  they  made  their  wayes  to  Honour  by  their 
fwords :  And  that  which  is  of  more  note,  (confidering 
my  Lord  of  Leicejler s  ufe  of  Men  of  Arms,  being 
fliortly  after  fent  Governour  to  the  Revolted  States, 
and  no  Souldier  himfelf)  is,  that  he  made  no  more 
accompt  of  Sir  lolm  Norris,  a  Souldier  then  defervedly 
famoufed,  and  trained  from  a  Page,  under  the  difcip- 
line  of  the  great  Captain  of  Chriftendome,  the  Ad- 
mirall  CaJlilio7i^  and  of  Command  in  the  French  and 
Dutch  wars  almofl  twenty  yeers.  It  is  of  further  ob- 
fervation,  that  my  Lord  of  EJfex  (after  Leicejlers  de- 
ceafe)  though  initiated  to  Armes,  and  honoured  by  the 
General  in  the  Portugal  expedition,  whether  out  of 
infligation  (as  it  hath  been  thought)  or  out  of  ambi- 


Favourites.  41 

tion,  and  jealoufie  to  be  eclipfcd  and  overfhadowed 
by  the  fame  and  fplendonr  of  this  great  Commander, 
loved  him  not  in  fmcerity.  Moreover,  certain  it  is, 
he  not  onely  cruHit,  and  upon  all  occafions  quell'd  the 
growth  of  this  brave  man,  and  his  famous  Brethren  ; 
but  therewith  drew  on  his  own  fatall  end,  by  under- 
taking the  Irifli  action,  in  a  time  when  he  left  the 
Court  empty  of  friends,  and  full  fraught  with  his  pro- 
feft  enemies.  But  I  forbear  to  extend  my  felf  in  any 
further  relation  upon  this  fubjedl;  as  having  left  fome 
notes  of  truth  in  thefe  two  Noble  Families,  which  I 
would  prefent ;  and  therewith  toucht  fomewhat,  which 
I  would  not,  if  the  equity  of  the  Narration  would  have 
admitted  an  intermiflion. 

Sir  loJin  Per  rot. 

[Ir  lohn  Perrot  was  a  goodly  Gentleman,  and 
of  the  Sword :  And  as  he  was  of  a  very  an- 
cient defcent,  as  an  heir  to  many  abfLradls 
of  Gentry,  efpecially  from  Guy  de  Bryan 
of  Laiuheni,  fo  was  he  of  a  vafl  Eflate, 
and  came  not  to  the  Court  for  want.  And  to  thefe 
adjun(fls,  he  had  the  endowments  of  couragt*,  and 
height  of  fpirit,  had  it  lighted  on  the  allay  of  temper 
and  discretion  ;  the  defect  whereof,  with  a  native  free- 
dome  and  boldneffe  of  fpeech,  drew  him  on  to  a  clouded 
fetting,  and  laid  him  open  to  the  fpleen  and  advantage 
of  his  enemies,  omongfl  whom  Sir  Chrijlopher  Hattofi 
was  profed.  He  was  yet  a  wife  man,  and  a  brave 
Courtier ;  but  rough,  and  participating  more  of  active 
than  fedentary  motions,  as  being  in  his  conflellation 
deflinated  for  Armes.  There  is  a  quaere  of  fon'^ 
denotations,  how  he  came  to  receive  his  foyle,  and  Lh:.t 
in  the  Cataflrophe ;  for  he  was  flrengthened  with  hon- 
ourable Alliances,  and  the  privy  friendfhips  of  the 
Court ;  My  Lord  of  Leicejler,  and  J3iir/cii:^h,  both  his 
Contemporaries,  and  Familiars;  but  that  there  might  be 
(as  the  Adage  hath  it)  falfity  in  friendfliip;  and  we  may 
refl  fatisfied,  that  there  is  no  difputing  againfl  fate. 


42  Queen  Elizabeth's 

They  quote  him  for  a  perfon  that  loved  to  {land  too 
much  alone,  and  on  his  own  legges  ;  of  too  often 
receffes,  and  difcontinuance  from  the  Queens  prefence; 
A  fault  which  is  incompatible  with  the  wayes  of  Court 
and  favour. 

He  was  fent  Lord  Deputy  into  Ireland,  (as  it  was 
thought)  for  a  kind  of  haughtineffe  of  fpirit,  and  re- 
pugnancy in  Councels ;  or  as  others  have  thought, 
the  fitted  perfon  then  to  bridle  the  infolency  of  the 
Irijli  \  And  probable  it  is,  that  both  thefe  (confidering 
the  fway  that  he  would  have  at  the  Board,  and  head 
in  the  Queens  favour)  concurred,  and  did  a  little  con- 
fpire  his  remove,  and  his  ruine  :  But  into  Ireland  he 
went,  where  he  did  the  Queen  very  great  and  many 
fervices,  if  the  furpluffage  of  the  meafure  did  not  abate 
the  value  of  the  merit ;  as  after-times  found  that  to  be 
no  paradox :  For  to  fave  the  Queens  purfe,  (which 
both  her  felf,  and  my  Lord  Treafurer  Burleigh,  ever 
took  for  good  fervices)  he  impofed  on  the  Irifi  the 
charge  of  bearing  their  own  armes ;  which  both  gave 
them  the  poffeffion,  and  taught  them  the  ufe  of  wea- 
pons; which  proved  in  the  end  a  mofi  fatall  work, 
both  in  the  profufion  of  bloud  and  treafure. 

But  at  his  return,  and  on  fome  account  fent  home 
before  touching  the  flate  of  the  Kingdome,  the  affidu- 
ous  teflimonies  of  her  grace  were  towards  him  ;  till  by 
his  retreat  to  his  Caftle  at  Cary,  where  he  was  then 
building,  and  out  of  defire  to  be  in  command  at  home, 
(as  he  had  been  abroad)  together  with  the  hatred  and 
pra6lire  of  Hatton,  then  in  high  favour,  whom  not  long 
before  he  had  too  bitterly  taunted  for  his  dancing,  He 
was  accufed  for  high  Treafon,  and  for  high  words  and 
a  forged  Letter,  condemned ;  though  the  Queen  on 
the  newes  of  his  condemnation,  fwore  by  her  wonted 
oath.  That  they  were  all  knaves.  And  they  deliver 
with  affurance.  That  on  his  return  to  the  Towner,  after 
his  Triall,  he  faid  in  oathes  and  in  fury  to  the  Lieu- 
tenant Sir  Owen  Hopton,  What,  will  the  Queen  fufifer 
her  Brother  to  be  offered  up  as  a  facrifice  to  the  envy 
of  my  frisking  adverfaries  ?   Which  being  made  known 


Favourites.  43 

to  the  Queen,  and  the  Warrant  for  his  execution  ten- 
dered, and  fomewhat  enforced ;  fhe  refufed  to  fign  it, 
and  fwore  he  fliould  not  die,  for  he  was  an  honefl  and 
a  faitlifull  man.  And  furely,  though  not  altogether  to 
fet  up  our  red  and  faith  upon  tradition,  and  upon  old 
report,  as  that  Sir  T/iofnas  Fcrrot  his  Father  was  a 
Gentleman  of  the  Privy-Chamber  to  Heiiry  the  eight, 
and  in  the  Court  married  a  Lady  of  great  honour,  of 
the  Kings  fiimiliarity,  which  are  prefumptions  of  fome 
implication  :  But  if  we  goe  a  little  further,  and  com- 
pare his  picflure,  his  qualities,  geflure,  and  voyce,  with 
that  of  the  Kings,  which  memory  retains  yet  amongfl 
us,  they  will  plead  flrongly,  that  he  was  a  fubrepticious 
child  of  the  bloud  Royall. 

Certain  it  is,  that  he  lived  not  long  in  the  Tower ; 
and  that  after  his  deceafe.  Sir  Thomas  Perrot  his  Son 
(ihen  of  no  mean  efleem  with  the  Queen)  having 
before  married  my  Lord  of  Effex  Sifler,  fmce  Countefs 
of  Northumberland^  had  reflitution  of  all  his  lands ; 
though  after  his  deceafe  alfo  (which  immediately  fol- 
lowed) the  Crown  refumed  his  Eflate,  and  took  ad- 
vantage of  the  former  Attainder.  And  to  fay  the 
truth,  the  Priefls  forged  Letter  was  at  his  arraignment 
thought  but  a  fi(flion  of  envy,  and  was  foon  after  ex- 
ploded by  the  Priefls  own  confeffion.  But  that  which 
mofl  exafperated  the  Queen,  and  gave  advantage  to 
his  enemies,  was  (as  Sir  Walter  Rawleigh  takes  into 
his  obfervation)  words  of  difdain.  For  the  Queen  by 
fharp  and  reprehenfive  Letters,  had  netled  him;  and 
fhortly  after  fending  others  of  approbation,  commend- 
ing his  fervice,  and  intimating  an  invafion  (rom  Spain; 
which  he  no  fooner  perufed,  but  he  faid  publiquely  in 
the  great  Chamber  at  Dublin  :  Lo,  now  flie  is  ready 
to  piffe  her  felf  for  fear  of  the  Spaniard;  I  am  again 
one  of  her  White-boyes. 

Words  which  are  fubjecl  to  a  various  conflru(Slion, 
and  tended  to  fome  difreputation  of  his  Sovcraign  : 
and  fuch  as  may  ferve  for  inflruction  to  perfons  in 
place  of  honour  and  command,  to  beware  of  the  vio- 


44  Quee7i  Elizabeths 

lences  of  nature,  but  efpecially  of  the  exorbitances  of 
the  tongue.  And  fo  I  conclude  him  with  this  double 
obfervation,  The  one  of  the  innocency  of  his  intentions, 
exempt  and  clear  from  the  guilt  of  treafon  and  dif- 
loyalty  ;  The  other,  of  the  greatneffe  of  his  heart :  For 
at  his  arraignment,  he  was  fo  little  dejedled  by  what 
might  be  alledged  and  proved  againfl  him,  that  he 
rather  grew  troubled  with  choler,  and  in  a  kind  of  ex- 
afperation  defpifed  his  Jury,  though  of  the  Order  of 
Knighthood,  and  of  the  fpeciall  Gentry,  claiming  the 
priviledge  of  triall  by  the  Peeres  and  Baronage  of  the 
Realm  :  fo  prevalent  was  that  of  his  native  Genius, 
and  the  haughtineffe  of  his  fpirit,  which  accompanied 
him  to  his  lafl,  and  till  (without  any  diminution  of 
courage)  it  brake  in  pieces  the  cords  of  his  magnani- 
mity, for  he  dyed  fuddenly  in  the  Tower,  and  when  it 
was  thought  the  Queen  did  intend  his  enlargement, 
with  the  reflitution  of  his  poffeffions,  which  were  then 
very  great,  and  comparable  to  moft  of  the  Nobility. 


Hatton, 

[IR  Chrijlopher  Hatton  came  into  the  Court 
as  his  oppofite,  Sir  lohn  Ferrot,  was  wont 
to  fay  by  the  Galliard,  for  he  came  thither 
as  a  private  Gentleman  of  the  Innes  of 
Court  in  a  Mask;  and  for  his  adlivity  and 
•perfon,  which  was  tall  and  proportionable,  taken  into 
favour :  he  was  firfl  made  Vice-Chamberlain,  and 
fiiortly  afterward  advanced  to  the  place  of  Lord  Chan- 
cellor :  a  Gentleman,  that  befides  the  graces  of  his 
perfon,  and  dancing,  had  alfo  the  adjedaments  of  a 
flrong  and  fubtill  capacity,  one  that  could  foon  learn 
the  difcipline  and  garb  both  of  the  times  and  Court ; 
the  truth  is,  he  had  a  large  proportion  of  gifts  and  en- 
dowments, but  too  much  of  the  feafon  of  envy  ;  and 
he  was  a  meer  vegetable  of  the  Court,  that  fprung  up 
at  night,  and  funk  again  at  his  noon. 


Favourites.  45 

Lord  Effingliain. 

|Y  Lord  of  Effing/iivn,  though  a  Courtier  be- 
times, yet  I  find  not,  that  the  fun-Hiine  of 
her  favour  broke  out  upon  him,  untill  flie 
took  him  into  the  Ship,  and  made  him 
High-A(hnirall  of  Etiglaiid.  For  his  ex- 
tract, it  may  fuffice,  that  he  was  the  fon  of  a  Hoivard, 
and  of  a  Duke  of  Norfolk  :  And  for  his  perfon,  as 
goodly  a  Gentleman  as  the  times  had  any;  if  Nature 
had  not  been  more  intentive  to  compleat  his  perfon, 
than  Fortune  to  make  him  rich  :  For  the  times  con- 
fidered,  which  were  then  active,  and  a  long  time  after 
lucrative,  he  dyed  not  wealthy,  yet  the  honeder  man  ; 
though  it  feemes  the  Queens  purpofe  was  to  tender  the 
occafion  of  his  advancement,  and  to  make  him  capable 
of  more  Honour:  which  at  his  return  from  Cadize- 
Accounts  file  conferred  on  him,  creating  him  Earle  of 
A^ottifig/iain  ;  to  the  great  difcontent  of  his  Colleague, 
my  Lord  of  Ejfex,  who  then  grew  exceffive  in  the  ap- 
petite of  her  favour  ;  and  in  truth,  was  fo  exorbitant  in 
the  limitation  of  the  Soveraign  afpecl,  that  it  much 
alienated  the  Queenes  grace  from  him,  and  drew  others 
together  with  the  Admirall  to  a  combination,  and  to 
confpire  his  ruine.  And  though  I  have  heard  it  from 
that  party,  (I  mean  of  the  Admirals  faction)  that  it  lay  not 
in  his  proper  power  to  hurt  my  Lord  oi  EJfex^yQt  he  had 
more  Followers,  and  fuch  as  were  well  skilled  in  fetting 
of  the  gyn.     But  I  leave  this  to  thofe  of  another  age. 

It  is  out  of  doubt,  that  the  Admirall  was  a  good,  honed, 
a.idabraveman,andafaithrullfervanttohisMiRrerfe,and 
fuch  a  one  as  the  Queen,  out  of  her  own  Princely  judge- 
ment, knew  to  be  a  fit  Inflrument  for  that  fervice,  for  fhe 
was  no  ill  Proficient  in  the  reading  ofMen,as  well  as  Books; 
and  his  fundry  expeditions,  as  that  aforementioned,  and 
88.  doth  both  expreffehis  worth,  and  manifefl  the  Queens 
tmfl,  and  the  opinion  flie  had  of  his  fidelity  and  condu6l. 
Moreover,  the  Hoiuards  were  of  the  Queenes  alli- 
ance and  confanguinity  by  her  Mother,  which  fvvayed 
her  afifedlion,  and  bent  it  toward  this  great  Houfe;  and 
it  was  part  of  her  naturall  propenfion,  to  grace  and 


46 


Queen  Elizabeth's 


fupport  ancient  Nobility,  where  it  did  not  intrench, 
neither  invade  her  interefl ;  for  on  fuch  trefpaffes  flie 
was  quick  and  tender,  and  would  not  fpare  any  what- 
foever ;  as  we  may  obferve  in  the  cafe  of  the  Duke, 
and  my  Lord  of  Hei-efoi'd,  whom  fhe  much  favoured 
and  countenanced,  till  they  attempted  the  forbidden 
fruit ;  The  fault  of  the  lafl,  being  in  the  fevered  in- 
terpretation but  a  trefpaffe  of  incroachment ;  But  in 
the  firft,  it  was  taken  for  a  Ryot  againfl  the  Crown, 
and  her  own  Soveraign  power  :  and  as  I  have  ever 
thought,  the  caufe  of  her  averfion  againfl  the  reft  cf 
the  Houfe,  and  the  Dukes  great  Fatlier-in-law  Fitz 
Allen  Earle  of  Arundel^  a  perfon  of  the  firfl  rank  in 
her  affe6tions,  before  thefe  ;  and  fome  other  jealoufies 
made  a  feparation  between  them  ;  this  Noble  Lord, 
and  the  Lord  Thotnas  Howard,  fmce  Earl  of  Suffolk, 
ftanding  alone  in  her  grace,  the  refl  in  umbrage. 

Sir  lohn  Packington. 

IR  lohn  Packington  was  a  Gentleman  of  no 
mean  family,  and  of  form  and  feature  no 
way  defpifable  ;  for  he  was  a  brave  Gen- 
tleman, and  a  very  fine  Courtier ;  and  for 
the  time  he  flayed  there,  (which  was  not 
lafting)  very  high  in  her  grace ;  but  he  came  in,  and 
went  out,  and  through  difaffiduity,  drew  the  Curtain 
between  himfelf  and  the  light  of  her  grace ;  and  then 
death  overwhelmed  the  remnant,  and  utterly  deprived 
him  of  recovery  :  And  they  fay  of  him,  that  had  he 
brought  leffe  to  the  Court  than  he  did,  he  might  have 
carried  away  more  than  he  brought ;  for  he  had  a 
time  on  it,  but  an  ill  husband  of  opportunity. 

Lord  Hun/don, 

Y  Lord  oi Hunfdon  was  of  the  Queens  neer- 
efl  kindred;  and  on  the  deceafe  oi Sttffex, 
both  he  and  his  Son  took  the  place  of 
Lord  Chamberlain  ;  he  was  a  fafl  man  to 
his  Prince,  and  firm  to  his  friends  and 


Favoiu'itcs.  47 

fen-ants ;  and  though  he  might  fpeak  big,  and  therein 
would  be  born  out,  yet  was  he  not  the  more  dreadfull, 
but  leffe  harmfull,  and  far  from  the  pracflife  of  my  Lord 
of  Lciccjiers  inflrudlions,  for  he  was  down-right ;  and 
I  have  heard  thofe  that  both  knew  him  well,  and  had 
interefl  in  him,  fay  merrily  of  him,  that  his  Latine  and 
his  difhmulation  were  both  alike  ;  and  that  his  cuflome 
of  fwearing,  and  obicenityin  fpeaking,  made  him  feem 
a  worfe  ChriRian  than  he  was,  and  a  better  Knight  of 
the  Carpet  than  he  fliould  be:  As  he  lived  in  a  ruffling 
time,  fo  he  loved  fword  and  buckler  men,  and  fuch  as 
our  Fathers  were  wont  to  call  men  of  their  hands  ;  of 
which  fort,  he  had  many  brave  Gentlemen  that  fol- 
lowed him  ;  yet  not  taken  for  a  popular  and  dangerous 
perfon  And  this  is  one  that  flood  amongll  the  Togati, 
of  an  honeR  Rout  heart,  and  fuch  a  one  (as  upon  oc- 
cafion)  would  have  fought  for  his  Prince,  and  his 
Country,  for  he  had  the  charge  of  the  Queens  Perfon, 
both  in  the  Court,  and  the  Camp  at  Tilbu7-y. 

Ra7i^Jcigh. 

|IR  Walter  Rawleigh  was  one,  that  (it  feems) 
Fortune  had  pickt  out  of  purpofe,  of  whom 
to  make  an  example,  or  to  ufe  as  her 
Tennis-Ball,  thereby  to  fhew  what  Rie 
could  doe  )  for  fhe  toR  him  up  of  no- 
tliing,  and  too  and  fro  to  grcatneffe,  and  from  thence 
down  to  little  more  than  to  that  wherein  flie  found 
him,  (a  bare  Gentleman)  Not  that  he  was  leffe,  for  he 
v>as  well  defcended,  and  of  good  alliance,  but  poor  in 
his  beginnings  :  and  for  my  Lord  of  Oxfords  jeR  of 
him,  (the  Jack,  and  an  upRart)  we  all  know,  it  favours 
more  of  emulation,  and  his  humour,  than  of  truth  ; 
and  it  is  a  certain  note  of  the  times,  that  the  Queen 
in  her  choice,  never  took  into  her  favour  a  meer  new 
man,  or  a  Mechanick,  as  Comines  obferves  of  Lewis  the 
eleventh  of  France,  who  did  ferve  himfelf  with  perfons 
of  unknown  Parents ;  fuch  as  was  Oliver  the  Barber, 
whom  he  created  Earle  of  Dunoyes,  and  made  him  ex 


48  Queen  Elizabeth's 

fecretis  confdiis^  and  alone  in  his  favour  and  famili- 
arity. 

His  approaches  to  the  Univerfity  and  Innes  of 
Court,  were  the  grounds  of  his  improvement;  but  they 
were  rather  excurfions,  than  fieges  or  fettings  down, 
for  he  flayed  not  long  in  a  place  ;  and  being  the 
youngefl  brother,  and  the  houfe  diminifhed  in  Patri- 
mony, he  forefaw  his  own  deftiny ;  that  he  was  firft  to 
roul  (through  want  and  difability  to  fubfifl  otherwayes) 
before  he  could  come  to  a  repofe,  and  as  the  flone 
doth  by  long  lying  gather  mofs  :  He  firfl  expofed  him- 
felf  to  the  Land  fervice  of  Ireland^  a  Militia  which 
then  did  not  yeeld  him  food  and  rayment,  (for  it  was 
ever  very  poor)  nor  had  he  patience  to  flay  there, 
though  Ihortly  after  he  came  thither  again  under  the 
command  of  my  Lord  Grey ;  but  with  his  own  Colours 
flying  in  the  field  ;  having  in  his  interim  cafl  a  new 
chance,  both  in  the  Lovy-Countries,  and  in  a  Voyage 
to  Sea ;  and  if  ever  man  drew  vertue  out  of  neceffity, 
it  was  he  :  therewith  was  he  the  great  example  of 
induftry ;  and  though  he  might  then  have  taken  that 
of  the  Merchant  to  himfelf.  Per  mare, per  terras,  currit 
mercator  ad  Lidos,  He  might  alfo  have  faid,  and  truly 
with  the  Phylofopher,  Omnia  mea  mecum  porto  ;  For  it 
was  a  long  time  before  he  could  brag  of  more  than  he 
carried  at  his  back  ;  and  when  he  got  on  the  winning 
fide,  it  was  his  commendations,  that  he  took  pains  for 
it,  and  underwent  many  various  adventures  for  his 
after-perfetlion,  and  before  he  came  into  the  publike 
note  of  the  World  :  And  that  it  may  appear  how  he 
came  up  {Per  ardua)  Per  varios  cafus,  per  tot  difcri- 
mina  reriim,  not  pulled  up  by  chance,  or  by  any  gentle 
admittance  of  Fortune;  1  will  briefly  defcribe  his 
native  parts,  and  thofe  of  his  own  acquiring,  which 
were  the  hopes  of  his  rifing. 

He  had  in  the  outward  man,  a  good  prefence,  in  a 
handfome  and  well  compacted  perfon,  a  flrong  naturall 
wit,  and  a  better  judgement,  with  a  bold  and  plaufible 
tongue,  whereby  he  could  fet  out  his  parts  to  the  befl 
advantage;  and  to  thefe  he  had  the  adjuncts  of  fome 


Favourites.  49 

gencrall  Learning,  which  by  diligence  he  enforced  to 
a  great  augmentation,  and  perfedlion;  for  he  was  an  in- 
defatigable Reader,  whether  by  Sea  or  Land,  and  none 
of  the  leafl  obfervers  both  of  men  and  the  times ;  and 
I  am  confident,  that  among  the  fecond  caiifes  of  his 
growth,  tliat  variance  between  him,  and  my  Lord  Grcy^ 
in  his  defcent  into  Ireland,  was  a  principall ;  for  it 
drew  them  both  over  the  Councell  Table,  there  to 
plead  their  caufe,  where  (what  advantage  he  had  in 
the  caufe,  I  know  not)  but  he  had  much  better  in  the 
telling  of  his  tale ;  and  fo  much,  that  the  Queen  and 
the  Lords  took  no  flight  mark  of  the  man,  and  his 
parts ;  for  from  thence  he  came  to  be  known,  and  to 
have  acceffe  to  the  Queen,  and  the  Lords  ;  and  then 
we  are  not  to  doubt  how  fuch  a  man  would  comply, 
and  learn  the  way  of  progreffion.  And  whether  Lei- 
cejler  had  then  cafl  in  a  good  word  for  him  to  the 
Queen,  which  would  have  done  no  harm,  I  doe  not 
determine  :  But  true  it  is,  He  had  gotten  the  Queens 
eare  at  a  trice,  and  fhe  began  to  be  taken  with  his 
elocution,  and  loved  to  hear  his  reafons  to  her  de- 
mands :  and  the  truth  is,  flie  took  him  for  a  kind  of 
Oracle,  which  netled  them  all ;  yea,  thofe  that  he 
relyed  on,  began  to  take  his  fuddain  favour  as  an 
Allarum,  and  to  be  fenfible  of  their  own  fupplantation, 
and  to  project  his,  which  made  him  fhortly  after  fmg. 
Fortune  my  foe,  &>c.  So  that  finding  his  favour  de- 
clining, and  falling  into  a  receffe,  he  undertook  a  new 
peregrination,  to  leave  that  Terra  ififirma  of  the  Court, 
for  that  of  the  Warres,  and  by  declining  himfelf,  and 
by  abfence,  to  expell  his,  and  the  paflion  of  his 
enemies,  which  in  Court  was  a  flrange  device  of  re- 
covery, but  that  he  knew  there  was  fome  ill  office 
done  him,  that  he  durfl  not  attempt  to  mind  any  other 
wayes,  than  by  going  afide  ;  thereby  to  teach  envy  a 
new  way  of  forgetfulneffe,  and  not  fo  much  as  to 
think  of  him ;  howfoever,  he  had  it  alwayes  in  mind, 
never  to  forget  himfelf;  and  his  device  took  fo 
well,  that  at  his  return  he  came  in  (as  Rammes  doe, 
by  going  backward)  with  the  greater  flrength,  and  fo 

D 


50  Qiteen  Elizabeth's 

continued  to  her  lafl,  great  in  her  grace,  and  Captain 
of  the  Guard,  where  I  mufl  leave  him ;  but  with  this 
obfervation,  That  though  he  gained  much  at  the 
Court,  yet  he  took  it  not  out  of  the  Exchequer,  or 
meerly  out  of  the  Queens  purfe,  but  by  his  wit,  and 
the  help  of  the  Prerogative  ;  for  the  Queen  was  never 
profufe  in  the  dehvering  out  of  her  treafure,  but  payed 
many,  and  moft  of  her  fervants  part  in  money,  and 
the  refl  with  grace,  which  as  the  cafe  flood,  was  taken 
for  good  payment,  leaving  the  Arrear  of  recompence 
due  to  their  merit,  to  her  great  Succeffor,  who  payed 
them  all  with  advantage. 


Grevil. 

IR  Foulk  Grevil^  fmce  Lord  Brook,  had  no 
mean  place  in  her  favour,  neither  did  he 
hold  it  for  any  fhort  term ;  for  if  I  be 
not  deceived,  he  had  the  longefL  leafe, 
and  the  fmoothefl  time  without  rub,  of 
any  of  her  Favourites.  He  came  to  the  Court  in  his 
youth  and  prime,  for  that  is  the  time,  or  never :  He 
was  a  brave  Gentleman,  and  honourably  defcended, 
from  William  Lord  Brook,  and  Admiral  to  Henry  the 
feventh.  Neither  illiterate ;  for  he  was,  as  he  would 
often  profeffe,  a  friend  to  Sir  Philip  Sidney,  and  there 
are  of  his  now  extant,  fome  fragments  of  his  Poem, 
and  of  thofe  times,  which  doe  interefl  him  in  the 
Mufes  ;  and  which  fhewes,  the  Queens  eledlion  had 
ever  a  noble  condu6l,  and  its  motions  more  of  vertue 
and  judgement,  than  of  fancy. 

I  find,  that  he  neither  fought  for,  or  obtained  any 
great  place  or  preferment  in  Court  during  all  the  time 
of  his  attendance,  neither  did  he  need  it ;  for  he  came 
thither,  backt  with  a  plentifull  Fortune,  which  as  him- 
felf  was  wont  to  fay,  was  the  better  held  together 
by  a  fmgle  life,  wherein  he  lived  and  dyed  a  conflant 
Courtier  of  the  Ladies. 


Favourites.  51 

Effex. 

Lord  of  EJfcx  (as  Sir  He?iry  Wottoji  a. 
Cientleman  of  great  parts,  and  partly  of 
his  time  and  retinue,  obferves)  had  his 
introdii(flion  by  my  Lord  of  Leicejlcr^  who 
had  married  his  ]NIother,  a  tie  of  affinity, 
which,  befides  a  more  urgent  obhgation,  might  have 
invited  his  care  to  advance  him,  his  Fortune  being 
then  (and  through  his  Fathers  infehcity)  grown  low. 
But  that  the  fon  of  a  Lord  Ferrers  of  C hartley,  Vif- 
count  Hartford,  and  Earle  of  Effex,  wlio  was  of  the 
ancient  Nobility,  and  formerly  in  the  Queens  good 
grace,  could  not  have  room  in  her  favour,  without 
the  affiRance  of  Leiccjler,  was  beyond  the  rule  of  her 
nature,  which  as  I  have  elfewhere  taken  into  obferva- 
tiv>n,-was  ever  inclinable  to  favour  the  Nobility  :  Sure 
it  is,  That  he  no  fooner  appeared  in  Court,  but  he 
took  with  the  Queen  and  Courtiers ;  and  I  believe, 
they  all  could  not  choofe  but  look  through  the  Sacrifice 
of  the  Father,  on  his  living  Sonne,  whofe  image,  by  the 
remembrance  of  former  paffages,  was  afrefh  (like  the 
bleeding  of  men  murdered)  reprefented  to  the  Court, 
and  offered  up  as  a  fubjecl  of  compaffion  to  all  the 
Kingdome.  There  was  in  this  young  Lord,  together 
with  a  mofl  goodly  Perfon,  a  kind  of  urbanity  or  in- 
nate courtefie,  which  both  won  the  Queen,  and  too 
much  took  upon  the  people,  to  gaze  upon  the  new 
adopted  fon  of  her  favour. 

And  as  I  goe  along,  it  were  not  amiffe  to  take  into 
obfervation  two  notable  quotations.  The  firfl  was,  a 
violent  indulgencie  of  the  Queen  (which  is  incident  to 
old  age,  where  it  encounters  with  a  pleafmg  and  fuit- 
able  object)  towards  this  Lord  ;  all  which  argued  a 
non-perpetuity:  The  fecond  was,  a  fault  in  the  Objecfl 
of  her  grace,  my  Lord  himfelf,  who  drew  in  too  fafl, 
like  a  childe  fucking  on  an  over-uberous  Nurfe  ;  and 
had  there  been  a  more  decent  decorum  obferved  in 
both,  or  either  of  thofe,  without  doubt  the  unity  of 
their  affedlions  had  been  more  permanent,  and  not  fo 


52  Queen  Elizabeth's 

in  and  out  as  they  were,  like  an  Inilrument  ill  tuned, 
and  lapfing  to  difcord. 

The  greater  errour  of  the  two  (though  unwillingly) 
I  am  conflrained  to  impofe  on  my  Lord  of  Effex,  or 
rather  on  his  youth;  and  none  of  the  leafl  of  his  blame 
on  thofe  that  flood  Sentinels  about  him,  who  might 
have  advifed  him  better,  but  that  like  men  intoxicated 
with  hopes,  they  likewife  had  fuckt  in  with  the  moR, 
and  of  their  Lords  receipt,  and  fo  like  Ccefars  would 
have  all  or  none  ;  A  rule  quite  contrary  to  nature,  and 
the  mofl  indulgent  Parents,  who  though  they  may  ex- 
preffe  more  atfedlion  to  one  in  the  abundance  of  be- 
quefls,  yet  cannot  forget  fome  Legacies,  jufL  diflribu- 
tives,  and  dividents  to  others  of  their  begetting  :  And 
how  hatefull  partiality  proves,  every  dayes  experience 
tells  us,  out  of  which  common  confideration  might 
have  framed  to  their  hands  a  maxime  of  more  difcre- 
tion  for  the  condu6l  and  management  of  their  now 
graced  Lord  and  Mafler. 

But  to  omit  that  of  infufion,  and  to  doe  right  to  truth  : 
My  Lord  of  EJfex  (even  of  thofe  that  truly  loved  and 
honoured  him)  was  noted  for  too  bold  an  ingroffer  both 
of  fame  and  favour ;  And  of  this  (without  offence  to 
the  living,  or  treading  on  the  facred  urne  of  the  dead) 
I  fhall  prefent  a  truth,  and  a  paffage  yet  in  memory. 

My  Lord  Mountjoy,  (who  was  another  child  of  her 
favour)  being  newly  come  to  Court,  and  then  but  Sir 
Charles  Bhint,  (for  my  Lord  William  his  elder  brother 
was  then  living)  had  the  good  fortune  one  day  to  run 
very  well  a  Tilt ;  and  the  Queen  therewith  was  fo  well 
pleafed,  that  fhe  fent  him  in  token  of  her  favour,  a 
Queen  at  Ckejfe  of  gold  richly  enameled,  which  his 
fervants  had  the  next  day  fafLned  on  his  Arme  with  a 
Crymfon  ribband;  which  my  Lord  of  Effex,  as  he 
paffed  through  the  Privy  Chamber  efpying,  with  his 
cloak  cafl  under  his  Arme,  the  better  to  commend  it 
to  the  view,  enquired  what  it  was,  and  for  what  caufe 
there  fixed  ?  Sir  Eoiilk  Grevil  told  him,  that  it  was 
the  Queens  favour,  which  the  day  before,  and  after 
the  Tilting  flie  had  fent  him;  whereat  my  Lord  ol Effex ^ 


Favo7irites.  53 

in  a  kind  of  emulation,  and  as  though  he  would  have 
limited  her  favour,  faid,  Now  I  perceive  every  fool 
mufl  have  a  favour. 

This  bitter  and  publike  affront  came  to  Sir  Charles 
Blunts  eare,  who  fent  him  a  challenge,  which  was  ac- 
cepted by  my  Lord,  and  they  met  near  Miwy-bonc- 
park,  where  my  Lord  was  hurt  in  the  thigh  and  dif- 
armed  :  the  Queen  miffmg  the  men,  was  very  curious 
to  learn  the  truth  ;  and  when  at  lafl  it  was  whifpered 
out,  file  fwore  by  Gods  death,  it  was  fit  that  fome  one 
or  other  fhould  take  him  down,  and  teach  him  better 
manners,  otherwife  there  would  be  no  rule  with  him. 
And  here  I  note  the  inition  of  my  Lords  friendfliip  with 
Moimtjo}\  which  the  Queen  her  felf  did  then  conjure. 

Now  for  fame,  we  need  not  goe  farre  ;  for  my  Lord 
of  Effcx  having  borne  a  grudge  to  Generall  Noi-ris^  who 
had  (unwittingly)  offered  to  undertake  the  a6lion  ot 
Britain  with  fewer  men,  than  my  Lord  had  before  de- 
manded :  on  his  return  with  vi(9;ory,  and  a  glorious 
report  of  his  valour,  he  was  then  thought  the  onely 
man  for  the  Irijii  Warre  ;  wherein  my  Lord  of  Effex 
fo  wrought,  by  defpifing  the  number,  and  quality  of 
Rebels,  that  Norris  was  fent  over  with  a  fcanted  force, 
joyned  with  the  reliques  of  the  veteran e  Troops  of 
Britain^  of  fet  purpofe  (as  it  fell  out)  to  ruine  Norris  ; 
and  the  Lord  Burrowes,  by  my  Lords  procurement, 
fent  at  his  heels,  and  to  command  in  chief;  and  to 
confine  Norris  onely  to  his  Government  at  MtmJIer, 
which  brake  the  great  heart  of  the  Generall,  to  fee 
himfelf  undervalued  and  undermined  by  my  Lord  and 
Biirro7ves^  which  was  as  the  Proverb  fpeakes  it,  Im- 
ba'bes  docere  fenes. 

My  Lord  Burrowes^  in  the  beginning  of  his  profe- 
cution  dyed  ;  whereupon  the  Queen  was  fully  bent  to 
have  fent  over  Moiintjoy,  which  my  Lord  of  Effex 
utterly  difliked,  and  oppofed  with  many  reafons,  and 
by  arguments  of  contempt  againfl  Monntjoy,  his  then 
profeffed  friend  and  familiar ;  fo  predominant  were 
his  words,  to  reap  the  honour  of  clofing  up  that 
Warre,  and  all  other. 


54  Queen  Elizabeth's 

Now  the  way  being  opened  and  plained  by  his  own 
workmanfhip,  and  fo  handled  that  none  durfl  appear 
to  Hand  for  the  place,  at  laft  with  much  adoe  he  ob- 
tained his  own  ends,  and  withall  bis  fatall  deflruclion, 
leaving  the  Queen  and  the  Court  (where  he  flood  firm 
and  impregnable  in  her  grace)  to  men  that  long  had 
fought  and  watcht  their  times  to  give  him  the  trip,  and 
could  never  find  any  opportunity  but  this  of  his  ab- 
fence,  and  of  his  own  creation.  And  thefe  are  the 
true  obfervations  of  his  appetite  and  inclinations, 
which  were  not  of  any  true  proportion,  but  carried  and 
tranfported  with  an  over-defire  and  thirflineffe  after 
fame,  and  that  deceitfull  fame  of  popularity.  And  to 
help  on  his  Cataflrophe,  I  obferve  likewife  two  forts 
of  people  that  had  a  hand  in  his  fall ;  the  firfl  was  the 
Souldiery,  which  all  flockt  unto  him,  as  foretelling  a 
mortality  ;  and  are  commonly  of  blunt  and  too  rough 
counfels,  and  many  times  diffonant  from  the  time  of 
the  Court  and  the  State.  The  other  fort  were  of  his 
family,  his  fervants,  and  his  own  creatures,  fuch  as 
were  bound  by  the  rules  of  fafety,  and  obligations  of 
fidelity,  to  have  looked  better  to  the  fleering  of  that 
Boat,  wherein  they  themfelves  were  carried,  and  not 
have  fuffered  it  to  float  and  run  on  ground,  with  thofe 
empty  Sailes  of  Fame  and  Rumour  of  popular  applaufe. 
Me  thinks  one  honefl  man  or  other,  that  had  but  the 
office  of  brufhing  his  clothes,  might  have  whifpered  in 
his  ear.  My  Lord,  look  to  it,  this  multitude  that  fol- 
lows you,  will  either  devour  you,  or  undoe  you ;  flrive 
not  to  rule,  and  over-rule  all,  for  it  will  cofl  hot  water, 
and  it  will  procure  envy  \  and  if  needs  your  Genius 
mufl  have  it  fo,  let  the  Court,  and  the  Queens  prefence 
be  your  flation.  But  as  I  have  faid,  they  had  fuckt 
too  much  of  their  Lords  milk,  and  inflead  of  with- 
drawing, they  blew  the  coales  of  his  ambition,  and 
infufed  into  him  too  much  of  the  fpirit  of  glory ;  yea, 
and  mixed  the  goodneffe  of  his  nature  with  a  touch  of 
revenge,  which  is  ever  accompanied  with  a  defliny  of 
the  fame  fate.  And  of  this  number  there  w^ere  fome 
infufferable  Natures  about  him,  that  towards  his  lad 


Favoicrites.  55 

gave  defperate  advice,  fuch  as  his  integrity  abhorred, 
and  his  fidelity  forbade  ;  Amongfl  whom,  Sir  Hcjiry 
Woiton  notes  (without  injury)  his  Secretary  Cuffe  a 
vile  man,  and  of  a  perverfe  nature  :  I  could  alfo  name 
others,  that  when  he  was  in  the  right  courfe  of  re- 
covery, and  fetling  to  moderation,  would  not  fufter  a 
recede  in  him,  but  flirred  up  the  dregs  of  thofe  rude 
humours,  which  by  time,  and  his  afflicftion,  out  of  his 
own  judgement  he  fought  to  repofe  ;  or  to  give  them 
all  a  vomit.  And  thus  I  conclude  this  Noble  Lord, 
as  a  mixture  between  profperity  and  adverfity  ;  once 
the  Childe  of  his  great  IMiftreffe  favour,  but  the  fon 
of  Belloiia. 

Bncklntrft. 

jjY  Lord  of  Biickhurjl  was  of  the  Noble 
Houfe  of  the  Sack7'i/s,  and  of  the  Queens 
confanguinity;  his  Father  was  Sir  Richard 
Sacki'ii,  or  as  the  people  then  called  him, 
Fill-fack,  by  reafon  of  his  great  wealth, 
and  the  vafl  patrimony  which  he  left  to  this  his  Son  ; 
whereof  he  fpent  in  his  youth  the  bed  part,  untill  the 
Queen  by  her  frequent  admonitions  diverted  the  tor- 
rent of  his  profufion.  He  was  a  very  fine  Gentleman 
of  perfon  and  endowments  both  of  art  and  nature  ; 
but  without  meafure  magnificent,  till  on  the  turn  of 
his  humour,  and  the  allay  that  his  yeares  and  good 
counfels  had  wrought  upon  thofe  immoderate  courfes 
of  his  youth,  and  that  height  of  fpirit  inherent  to  his 
Houfe.  And  then  did  the  Queen,  as  a  mofl  judicious 
and  indulgent  Prince,  when  fhe  faw  the  man  grow 
flayed  and  fetled,  give  him  heraffiflance,  and  advanced 
him  to  the  Treafurerfliip,  where  he  made  amends  to 
his  Houfe  for  his  mif-fpcnt  time,  both  in  the  increafe- 
ment  of  Eflate  and  Honour,  which  the  Queen  conferred 
on  him,  together  with  the  opportunity  to  remake  liimfelf, 
and  thereby  to  fhew  that  this  was  a  Childe,  that  fhould 
have  a  fliare  in  her  grace,  and  a  tafle  of  her  bounty. 

They  much  commend  his  Elocution,  but  more  the 
excellency  of  his   Pen,  for  he  was  a  SchoUar,  and  a 


56  Queen  Elizabeth's 

perfon  of  a  quick  difpatch,  (Faculties  that  yet  run  in 
the  bloud)  And  they  fay  of  him,  that  his  Secretaries 
did  Httle  for  him  by  the  way  of  Inditement,  wherein 
they  could  feldome  pleafe  him,  he  was  fo  facete  and 
choice  in  his  phrafe  and  ftile  :  And  for  his  Difpatches, 
and  the  content  he  gave  to  Suiters,  he  had  a  decorum 
feldome  fmce  put  in  pra6life ;  for  he  had  of  his  At- 
tendants that  took  into  Roll  the  names  of  all  Suiters, 
with  the  Date  of  their  firfl  Addreffes  ;  and  thefe  in 
their  Order  had  hearing ;  fo  that  a  frefh  man  could 
not  leap  over  his  head,  that  was  of  a  more  ancient 
edition,  except  in  the  urgent  affaires  of  State. 

I  find  not,  that  he  was  any  wayes  infnared  in  the 
factions  of  the  Court,  which  were  all  his  times  flrong, 
and  in  every  mans  note  ;  The  Howards  and  the  Cecils 
on  the  one  part.  My  Lord  of  Ejfex^  etc.  on  the  other 
part.  For  he  held  the  ftaffe  of  the  Treafury  fafl  in  his 
hand,  which  once  in  the  year  made  them  all  beholding 
to  him.  And  the  truth  is,  (as  he  was  a  wife  man,  and 
a  flout)  he  had  no  reafon  to  be  a  partaker ;  for  he 
ftood  fure  in  bloud,  and  in  grace,  and  was  wholly  in- 
tentive  to  the  Queens  fervice ;  and  fuch  were  his 
abilities,  that  fhe  received  affiduous  proofes  of  his  fuffi- 
ciency  ;  and  it  hath  been  thought,  that  flie  might  have 
had  more  cunning  inflruments,  but  none  of  a  more 
flrong  judgement  and  confidence  in  his  wayes,  which 
are  fymptomes  of  magnanimity  and  fidelity ;  where- 
unto  me  thinkes  this  Motto  hath  fome  kind  of  refer- 
ence, Aut  7mnqica7n  te7ites^  aut  perfice.  As  though  he 
would  have  chara6lered  in  a  word  the  Genius  of  his 
Houfe,  or  exprefl  fomewhat  of  an  higher  inclination, 
than  lay  within  his  compaffe.  That  he  was  a  Courtier, 
is  apparent,  for  he  flood  alwayes  in  her  eye  and  favour. 

Lord  Motmtjoy. 

jY  Lord  Mountjoy  was  of  the  ancient  No- 
bility, but  utterly  deceived  in  the  fapport 
thereof,  Patrimony ;  through  his  Grand- 
fathers excefs  in  the  a6lion  of  Bulle7i, 
his   Fathers  vanity  in  the   fearch  of  the 


u 


Favourites.  57 

Philofophers  (lone,  and  his  Brothers  untimely  prodi- 
gaUties  ;  all  which  feemed  by  a  joynt  confpiracy  to 
ruine  the  Houfe,  and  altogether  to  annihilate  it. 

As  he  came  from  Oxford^  he  took  the  Ifmer- Temple 
in  his  way  to  Court ;  whither  he  no  fooner  came,  but 
(without  asking)  he  had  a  pretty  flrange  kind  of  ad- 
miffion,  which  I  have  heard  from  a  difcreet  man  of  his 
own,  and  much  more  of  the  fecrets  of  thofe  times. 
He  was  then  much  about  twenty  yeares  of  age,  of  a 
Brown  hair,  a  fweet  face,  a  mofl  neat  Compofure,  and 
tall  in  his  perfon.  The  Queen  was  then  at  White- 
Hall^  and  at  dinner,  whither  he  came  to  fee  the  fa- 
fhion  of  the  Court  :  the  Queen  had  foon  found  him  out, 
and  with  a  kind  of  an  affected  frown,  asked  the  Lady 
Carver  what  he  was  ?  fhc  anfwered.  She  knew  him 
not ;  Infomuch  as  enquiry  was  made  from  one  to 
another,  who  he  might  be ;  till  at  length  it  was  told 
the  Queen,  he  was  Brother  to  the  Lord  William 
Mountjoy.  This  inquifition,  with  the  eye  of  Majefly 
fixed  upon  him,  (as  fhe  was  wont  to  doe,  and  to  daunt 
men  flie  knew  not)  flirred  the  bloud  of  this  young 
Gentleman,  infomuch  as  his  colour  came  and  went ; 
which  the  Queen  obferving,  called  him  unto  her,  and 
gave  him  her  hand  to  kiffe,  encouraging  him  with 
gracious  words,  and  new  lookes ;  and  lo  diverting  her 
fpeech  to  the  Lords  and  Ladies,  fhe  faid.  That  fhe  no 
fooner  obferved  him,  but  that  fhe  knew  there  was  in 
him  fome  Noble  bloud,  with  fome  other  expreffions  of 
pity  towards  his  houfe :  And  then  again  demanding 
his  name,  flie  faid,  Fail  you  not  to  come  to  the  Court, 
and  I  will  bethink  my  felf  how  to  doe  you  good.  And 
this  was  his  inlet,  and  the  beginnings  of  his  grace. 
Where  it  falls  into  confideration.  That  though  he 
wanted  not  wit  and  courage,  (for  he  had  very  fine  At- 
tra6tions,  and  being  a  good  piece  of  a  SchoUar)  yet 
were  they  accompanied  with  the  retradliveneffe  of 
bafhfulneffe,  and  a  naturall  modefly,  which  (as  the 
tone  of  his  houfe,  and  the  ebbe  of  his  fortune  then 
flood)  might  have  hindred  his  progreffion,  had  they 
not  been  re-inforced  by  the  infufion  of  Soveraign 
favour,  and  the  Queens  gracious  invitation.     And  that 


58  Queen  Elizabeth's 

it  may  appear  how  low  he  was,  and  how  much  that 
heretique  Neceffity  will  work  in  the  deje6lion  of  good 
fpirits,  I  can  deliver  it  with  affurance,  that  his  exhibi- 
tion was  very  fcant  untill  his  Brother  dyed,  which  was 
Ihortly  after  his  admiffion  to  the  Court,  and  then  was 
it  no  more  than  looo  Marks /^r  anniivi^  wherewith  he 
lived  plentifully  in  a  fine  way  and  garb,  and  without 
any  great  fuflenation,  during  all  her  times.  And  as 
there  was  in  his  nature  a  kind  of  backwardneffe,  which 
did  not  befriend  him,  nor  fuit  v/ith  the  motion  of  the 
Court,  fo  there  was  in  him  an  inclination  to  Armes, 
and  a  humour  of  travelling :  which  had  not  fome  wife 
men  about  him  laboured  to  remove,  and  the  Queen 
her  felf  laid  in  her  commands,  he  would  (out  of  his 
naturall  propenfion)  have  marred  his  own  market : 
For  as  he  was  grown  by  reading  (whereunto  he  was 
much  addi61ed)  to  the  Theory  of  a  Souldier,  fo  was  he 
ftrongly  invited  by  his  Genius  to  the  acquaintance  of 
the  praclique  of  the  Warre  ;  which  were  the  caufes  of 
his  excurfions ;  for  he  had  a  company  in  the  Low- 
Countries,  from  whence  he  came  over  with  a  Noble 
acceptance  of  the  Queen ;  but  fomewhat  reftleffe  in 
honourable  thoughts,  he  expofed  himfelf  again  and 
again,  and  would  preffe  the  Queen  with  the  pretences 
of  vifiting  his  Company  fo  often,  that  at  length  he  had 
a  flat  deniall ;  and  yet  he  flole  over  with  Sir  John 
Norris  into  the  action  of  Britaht,  (which  was  then  a 
hot  and  a6live  Warre)  whom  he  would  ahvayes  call 
his  Father,  honouring  him  above  all  men,  and  ever 
bewailing  his  end  :  fo  contrary  he  was  in  his  efleem 
and  valuation  of  this  great  Commander,  to  that  of  his 
friend,  my  Lord  of  Effex.  Till  at  laft,  the  Queen  be- 
gan to  take  his  deceffions  for  contempts,  and  confined 
his  refidence  to  the  Court,  and  her  own  prefence :  And 
upon  my  Lord  Effex  fall,  (fo  confident  Ihe  was  in  her 
own  Princely  judgement,  and  opinion  flie  had  con- 
ceived of  his  worth  and  conducfl)  that  flie  would 
have  this  noble  Gentleman,  and  none  other,  to 
finifli  and  bring  the  Irifli  Warre  to  a  propitious  end  : 
For  it  was  propheticall  fpeech  of  her  own.  That  it 
would    be  his   fortune,  and  his    honour,   to    cut  the 


Favourites.  59 

thred  of  that  fatall  Rebellion,  and  to  bring  her  in 
peace  to  the  grave.  Where  Hie  was  not  deceived;  for 
he  atchieved  it,  but  with  much  paines  and  carefulneffe, 
and  not  without  the  feares  and  many  jealoufies  of  the 
Court  and  times,  wherewith  the  Queens  age,  and  the 
malignity  of  her  fetting  times  were  replete. 

And  fo  I  come  to  his  dear  Friend  in  Court,  Mafler 
Secretary  Cecily  whom  in  his  long  abfence  from  Court 
he  adored  as  his  Saint,  and  courted  for  his  onely 
McBcenas,  both  before  and  after  his  departure  from 
Court,  and  during  all  the  time  of  his  Command  in 
Irdand,  well  knowing  that  it  lay  in  his  power,  and  by 
a  word  of  his  mouth,  to  make  or  marre  him. 

Cecil 

;IR  Robert  Cecil,  fmce  Earle  of  Salisbury ^ 
was  the  fon  of  the  Lord  Btirleig/i,  and  the 
inheritor  of  his  wifedome,  and  by  degrees, 
Succeffor  of  his  places  and  favours,  though 
not  of  his  Lands ;  for  he  had  TJiomas 
Cecil  his  elder  brother,  fmce  created  Earle  of  Exeter. 
He  was  firfl  Secretary  of  State,  then  Mafler  of  the 
Wards,  and  in  the  lafl  of  her  raign  came  to  be  Lord 
Treafurer ;  all  which  were  the  fleps  of  his  Fathers 
greatneffe,  and  of  the  honour  he  left  to  his  Houfe. 
For  his  perfon,  he  was  not  much  beholding  to  nature, 
though  fomewhat  for  his  face,  which  was  the  befl  part 
of  his  outfide  :  but  for  his-infide,  it  may  be  faid,  and 
without  foloecifme,  that  he  was  his  Fathers  own  fon, 
and  a  pregnant  proficient  in  all  difcipline  of  State  : 
He  was  a  Courtier  from  his  Cradle,  (which  might  have 
made  him  betimes)  yet  at  the  age  of  twenty  and  up- 
wards, he  was  much  fhort  of  his  after-proof;  but  ex- 
pofed,  and  by  change  of  climate,  he  foon  made  fhew 
what  he  was,  and  would  be  :  He  lived  in  thofe  times 
wherein  the  Queen  had  mofl  need,  and  ufe  of  men  of 
weight ;  and  amongfl  able  ones,  this  was  a  chief,  as 
having  his  fufficiency  from  his  inflruclions  that  begat 
him,  the  Tutorfhip  of  the  times,  and  Court,  which  were 


6o  Queen  Elizabeth's 

then  the  Academies  of  Art  and  Cunning;  for  fuch  was 
the  Queens  condition  from  the  tenth  or  twelfth  of  her 
Raign,  that  fhe  had  the  happineffe  to  ftand  up  (where- 
of there  is  a  former  intimation)  though  invironed  with 
more  enemies,  and  affaulted  with  more  dangerous 
pradlifes,  than  any  Prince  of  her  times,  and  of  many 
ages  before.  Neither  mufL  we  in  this  her  prefervation 
attribute  too  much  to  humane  pohcies  :  for  that  God 
in  his  omnipotent  providence  had  not  onely  ordained 
thofe  fecundary  meanes,  as  inflruments  of  the  work, 
but  by  an  evident  manifeflation,  that  the  fame  work 
which  fhe  acled,  was  a  well-pleafmg  fervice  of  his  own, 
out  of  a  pecuUar  care  had  decreed  the  protedlion  of 
the  work-Miflreffe,  and  thereunto  added  his  abundant 
bleffmg  upon  all,  and  whatfoever  fhe  undertook ;  which 
is  an  obfervation  of  fatisfadion  to  my  felf,  that  fhe  was 
in  the  right ;  though  to  others  now  breathing  under 
the  fame  form,  and  frame  of  her  Government,  it  may 
not  feem  an  animadverfion  of  any  worth  :  but  I  leave 
them  to  the  perill  of  their  own  folly. 

And  fo  again  to  this  great  Mafter  of  State,  and  the 
Staffe  of  the  Queens  declining  age ;  who  though  his 
little  crooked  perfon  could  not  promife  any  great  fup- 
portation,  yet  it  carried  thereon  a  head,  and  a  head- 
piece of  a  vafl  content,  and  therein  it  feemes  nature 
was  fo  diligent  to  compleat  one,  and  the  befl  part 
about  him,  as  that  to  the  perfedlion  of  his  memory, 
and  intelle6luals,  fhe  took  care  alfo  of  his  fences,  and 
to  put  him  into  Linceos  Oculos,  or  to  pleafure  him  the 
more,  borrowed  of  Argus,  fo  to  give  unto  him  a  pro- 
fpe6tive  fight ;  and  for  the  reft  of  his  fenfitive  vertues, 
his  predeceffor  Walfmgham  had  left  him  a  receit,  to 
fmell  out  what  was  done  in  the  Conclave  ;  and  his 
good  old  Father  was  fo  well  ften  in  the  Mathematicks, 
as  that  he  could  tell  you  through  all  Spain,  every  part, 
every  Ship,  with  the  burthens,  whither  bound  with 
preparation,  what  impediments  for  diverfion  of  enter-, 
prifes,  counfels,  and  refolutions.  And  that  we  may 
fee  (as  in  a  little  Map)  how  docible  this  little  man 
was ;  I  will  prefent  a  tafle  of  his  abilities. 


Favotirites.  6i 

My  Lord  of  Dei'07i/Jiirey  (upon  the  certainty  the 
Spaniard  would  invade  Ireland  with  a  (Irong  Army) 
had  written  very  earneRly  to  the  Queen  and  the  Coun- 
cell,  for  fuch  fupphes  to  be  fent  over,  that  might  en- 
able him  to  march  up  to  the  Spaniard,  if  he  did  land, 
and  follow  on  his  profecution  againfl  the  Rebels.  Sir 
Robert  Cecily  (befides  the  generall  difpatch  of  the 
Councell,  as  he  often  did)  wrote  this  in  private ;  for 
thefe  two  began  then  to  lo\  e  dearly. 

My  Lord,  Out  of  the  abundimce  of  my  affeBion,  and 
the  care  I  have  of  your  tue//-doing ;  I  nmjfl  in  private 
put  you  out  of  doubt,  i^for  of  fear  I  know  you  cannot  be 
otherzc'ife  fenfb/e,  thaji  iji  the  way  of  Honour)  that  the 
Spaniard  wi/l  not  come  unto  you  this  year ;  for  I  have  it 
from  my  owjt,  what  preparations  are  in  all  his  parts ^ 
and  what  he  can  doe :  for  be  confident,  he  beareth  up  a 
7-eputatioji  by  fee  mi ng  to  end)race  more  than  he  can  gripe  \ 
but  the  7iext  year,  be  afsured,  he  will  cafl  over  unto  you 
fome  forlorn  hopes,  which  how  they  may  be  reinforced 
beyond  his  prefent  ability,  a?  id  his  frfl  intention,  I  cannot 
as  yet  make  any  certain  judgement,  but  I  believe  out  of 
;ny  iiitelligence,  that  you  may  expeH:  their  landing  in 
.\IunRer,  ajid  the  more  to  diflracl  you,  in  feverall places, 
as  at  Kings-Saile,  Beer-haven,  Baltimore,  where  you 
may  be  fur e  {coming  from  Sea)  they  will  firfl  fortifie  ami 
lear?i  the  fl?'ength  of  the  Rebels,  before  they  dare  take  the 
field;  howforuer  {as  I  know  you  will  7iot)  leffen  not  your 
care,  neither  your  defences  ;  a?id  whatfoever  lies  within 
my  po'iver  to  doe  you  a? id  the  publike  fervice,  refl  thereof 
affured. 

And  to  this  I  would  adde  much  more,  but  it  may 
(as  it  is)  fufifice  to  prefent  much  as  to  his  abilities  in 
the  Pen,  that  he  was  his  Crafts-mafter  in  forraign  in- 
telligence :  And  for  domeflique  affaires,  as  he  was  one 
of  thofe  that  fate  at  the  Stern  to  the  lafl  of  the  Queen, 
fo  he  was  none  of  the  leafl  in  skilly  and  in  the  true  ufe 
of  the  Compaffe. 

And  fo  I  fhall  onely  vindicate  the  fcandall  of  his 
death,  and  conclude  him :  For  he  departed  at  S.  Mar- 


62  Queen  Elizabeth's 

garets  neer  Marleborough,  in  his  return  from  the  Bath ; 
as  my  Lord  Vifcount  Cranborne,  my  Lord  Clifford  his 
Son,  and  Son-in-law,  my  felf,  and  many  more  can 
witneffe.  But  that  the  day  before  he  fwounded  in  the 
way,  was  taken  out  of  the  Litter,  and  laid  into  his 
Coach,  was  a  truth,  out  of  which  that  falfhood,  con- 
cerning the  manner  of  his  death,  had  its  derivation, 
though  nothing  to  the  purpofe,  or  to  the  prejudice 
of  his  worth. 

l^ere. 


liIR  Fra7icis  Vere  was  of  the  ancient  and  of 
the  moft  Noble  extra6l  of  the  Earles  of 
Oxford :  And  it  may  be  a  queflion,  whe- 
ther the  Nobility  of  his  Houfe,  or  the 
Honour  of  his  Atchievements  might  mofl 

commend  him  ;  but  that  we  have  an  authentique  Rule 

to  decide  the  doubt : 

Nam  genus  et  proavos,  et  qu(2  nonfecimus  ipfi, 

Fix  ea  nojlra  voco. 

For  though  he  were  an  Honorable  Slip  of  that  ancient 
Tree  of  Nobility,  (which  was  no  difadvantage  to  his 
vertue)  yet  he  brought  more  glory  to  the  Name  of 
Vere  than  he  took  of  Bloud  from  the  Family.  He 
was  amongft  the  Queens  Sword-men  inferior  to  none, 
but  fuperior  to  many  :  Of  whom  it  may  be  faid.  To 
fpeak  much  of  him,  were  the  way  to  leave  out  fome- 
thing  that  might  adde  to  his  praife,  and  to  forget  more 
that  could  adde  to  his  Honour. 

I  find  not  that  he  came  much  to  the  Court,  for  he 
lived  almoft  perpetually  in  the  Camp  :  but  when  he 
did,  no  man  had  more  of  the  Queens  favour,  and  none 
leffe  envied ;  for  he  feldome  troubled  it  with  the  jeal- 
oufie  and  allarums  of  fupplantations ;  his  way  was 
another  fort  of  undermining.  They  report,  that  the 
Queen  (as  fhe  loved  Martiall  men)  would  Court  this 
Gentleman  as  foon  as  he  appeared  in  her  prefence.  And 
furely  he  was  a  Souldier  of  great  worth,  and  com- 
manded thirty  yeares  in  the  fer\dce  of  the  States,  and 


Favourites.  63 

twenty  yeares  over  the  Engiijli  in  chief,  as  the  Queens 
Generall :  and  he  that  had  feen  the  Battail  of  Newport, 
might  there  befl  have  taken  him,  and  his  Noble 
Brother  my  Lord  of  Tilbury,  to  the  hfe. 

lVo7xeJter. 

\  Lord  of  Worccjlcr  I  have  here  put  lafl, 
but  not  lead  in  the  Queens  f^ivour.  He 
was  of  the  ancient  and  noble  Bloud  of 
the  Bewfords,  and  of  her  Grandfathers 
line  by  the  Mother ;  which  the  Queen 
could  never  forget,  efpecially  where  there  was  a  con- 
currencie  of  old  bloud  with  fidelity,  a  mixture  which 
ever  forted  with  the  Queens  nature.  And  though 
there  might  appear  fomething  in  this  Houfe  which 
might  avert  her  grace,  (though  not  to  fpeak  of  my 
Lord  himfelf,  but  with  due  reverence  and  honour)  [ 
mean  contrariety  or  fufpition  in  Religion ;  yet  the 
Queen  ever  refpe(fled  tliis  Houfe,  and  principally  this 
Noble  Lord,  whom  flie  firfl  made  Mafler  of  the  Horfe, 
and  then  admitted  of  her  Councell  of  State.  In  his 
youth  (part  whereof  he  fpent  before  he  came  to  refide 
at  Court)  he  was  a  very  fine  Gentleman,  and  the  befl 
Horfeman  and  Tilter  of  the  times,  which  were  then 
the  manlike  and  noble  recreations  of  the  Court, 
and  fuch  as  took  up  the  applaufe  of  men,  as  well  as 
the  praife  and  commendation  of  Ladies.  And  when 
yeares  had  abated  thefe  Exercifes  of  Honour,  he  grew 
then  to  be  a  faithfull  and  profound  Counceller.  And 
as  I  have  placed  him  lafl,  fo  was  he  the  laR  liver  of 
all  the  Servants  of  her  favour,  and  had  the  honour  to 
fee  his  renowned  MiRreffe,  and  all  of  them  laid  in  the 
places  of  their  reft :  And  for  himfelf,  after  a  life  of 
a  veiy  noble  and  remarkable  reputation,  he  dyed  rich, 
and  in  a  peaceable  old  age.  A  fate  (that  I  make'  the 
lafl,  and  none  of  the  flightefl  obfervations)  which  be- 
fell not  many  of  the  refl ;  for  they  expired  like  unto 
lights  blown  out,  with  the  fnuffe  flinking,  not  commend- 
ably  extinguifhed,  and  with  offence  to  the  flanders  by. 


64  Queen  Elizabeth's  Favourites. 

And  thus  I  have  deHvered  up  this  my  poor  Effay; 
A  little  Draught  of  this  great  Princefs,  and  her  Times, 
with  the  Servants  of  her  State  and  favour.  I  cannot 
fay,  I  have  finifhed  it ;  for  I  know  how  defective  and 
imperfe6l  it  is,  as  limbed  onely  in  the  originall  nature, 
not  without  the  a(5live  blemifhes ;  and  fo  left  it  as  a 
task  fitter  for  remote  times,  and  the  fallies  of  fome 
bolder  Penfil  to  correal  that  which  is  am.iffe,  and  draw 
the  refl  up  to  life.  As  for  me  to  have  endeavoured 
it,  I  took  it  to  confideration,  how  eafily  I  might  have 
dafht  in  too  much  of  the  flrain  of  pollution,  and 
thereby  have  defaced  that  little  which  is  done  :  For 
I  profeffe,  I  have  taken  care  fo  to  mafler  my  Pen, 
that  I  might  not  {ex  animo,  or  of  fet  purpofe)  difcolour 
truth,  or  any  of  the  parts  thereof,  otherwife  than  in 
concealment.  Happily  there  are  fome  which  will  not 
approve  of  this  modefly,  but  will  cenfure  me  for  pufiU- 
animity,  and  with  great  cunning  Artifls  attempt  to 
draw  their  Line  further  out  at  large,  and  upon  this  of 
mine ;  which  may  with  fomewhat  more  eafe  be  effedled, 
for  that  the  frame  is  ready  made  to  their  hands ;  and 
then  happily  I  could  draw  one  in  the  midfl  of  theirs. 
But  that  modefly  in  me  forbids  the  defacements  of 
Men  departed,  whofe  Poflerity  yet  remaining,  enjoyes 
the  merit  of  their  vertues,  and  doe  flill  live  in  their 
Honour.  And  I  had  rather  incurre  the  cenfure  of 
abruption,  than  to  be  confcious,  and  taken  in  the 
manner  of  eruption,  and  of  trampling  upon  the  graves 
of  Perfons  at  reft ;  which  living,  we  durfl  not  look  in 
the  face,  nor  make  our  addreffes  to  them,  otherwife 
than  with  due  regard  to  their  Honours,  and  renown  to 
their  Vertues. 


FINIS. 


Muir  <&»  Paterson,  Prijiters,  Edinburgh. 


THOMAS     WATSON. 
POEMS. 

VIZ. : — 

Tlie  'EKATOMHAeiA  or  Pajfionate  Centurie 

of  Love. 
[1582.] 

Melibxus,  sive  Ecloga  Inobitum,  &c. 

1590, 

An  Eglogiie  upon  the  death  of  Right 

Ho?iorable  Sir  Francis  Walfingham. 

1590- 

The  Teares  of  Fancy  or  Love  difdained. 

Posthumously  published  in  1593. 
From  the  unique  copy  in  the  collection  of  S.  Christie-Miller,  Esq. 


CALEFULLY  EDITED  BY 

EDWARD    AKRER. 

AJfociate,  King's  College,  Lotidon,  F.R.G.S.,  6^c. 


LONDON : 

5  QUKEN  SQU.'VkK,   HJ,o<  >MSHL'k V,  W  ( 

Ent.  Stat.  Hall.]  I  October,   1 870.  [All  Rights  re/erved. 


CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

Some  Account  of  the  Writings  of  Thomas  Watson    .     3-1 7 
Bibliography    ......        18 

Index  of  First  Lines,  &c.        ....    19-22 

The  *^Karoinra6ia  or  Pafflonate  Centurie  of  Love  23 

(i)  The  Epiftle  Dedicatorie  [to  the  Earl  of  Oxford]     .        25 

(2)  To  the  friendly  Reader  .  .  .  .27 

(3)  John  Lyly  to  the  Authour  his  friend  .  .         29 

(4)  Authoris  ad  Libelhujt  fuicm  ProtrepticoTt       .  .         3 1 

(5)  Recommendatory  verfes  by  G.  Bucke,  T.  Acheley, 

C.  Downhall,  M.  Roydon,  and  G.  Peele  33-36 

(6)  The  Author  '  unto  this  booke  of  Love  paffions '        .         36 

(7)  Seventy-nine  Poems,  numbered  1.  to  LXXIX,  37"ii5 

.*.  The  remaining  twenty-one  poems  are  written 
upon  one  Pofy,  My  Love  is  Pajl. 

(8)  A  Pafquin  Pillar  erected  in  the  Defpite  of  Love        116- 118 

(9)  Twenty  Poems,  numbered  LXXXIII.  to  CIL  1 19-138 
(10)  Quid  Amor               .             .             .             .             •       135 

Melihxiis  five  Ecloga  Inobitum,  &>€.  140 

(i)  Dedication  to  Thomas  Walsingham,  Efq.  .       142 

(2)  Ecloga  Inobitum,  &c.       ....       148 

(Set  o?  ft  he  following-  even  numbe}'ed  pages. ) 

An  Eglogue  upon  the  death  of  the  Right  Hon. 

Sir  F.   Walfmgham        .  .      141 

(i)  Dedication  to  Lady  Frances  Sidney         .  .       145 

(2)  To  the  courteous  Reader      ....       147 
{3)  An  Eglogue,  &c.  &c.         .  .  .  .      149^ 

(Set  on  the  following  odd  numbered  pages.) 

The  Teares  of  Fancy  or  Love  difdained  .      177 

(i)  A  Dedicatory  Sonnet  ....       178 

(2)  Fifty-two  Sonnets,  numbered  i  to  60  .  1 79-208 

.'.  Pages  6  toZ  of  the  original,  bearing  So7tnets  ix.-xvi.,  are 

wanting  in  the  only  co/>v  at  present  known. 


Some  Account  of  the  Writings  of 
THOMAS     WATSON. 


^^V^IKE  a  diver  returning  from  the  deep,  we  here  gladly  present  four 
/  ii'>Vd  lost  Pearls  of  Englisli  Literature.  The  oblivion  which  has  hitherto 
M-dL^eiA  covered  the  name  and  works  of  Thomas  Watson  has  been  wholly 
ih-S^^  unmerited.     Adequately  acknowledged  in  his  own  time,  he  gradu- 

i£^>''9^'  ally  became  lost  amidst  the  host  of  competitors  for  the  Attention 
of  the  Nation  :  until  he  himself  has  become  imknown  even  to 
writers  of  Guides  or  Handbooks  to  English  Literature ;  and  his  works  have 
become  among  the  scarcest  of  the  scarce  in  our  language.  Not  hut  what 
tliere  have  been  a  succession  of  Scholar-Critics  from  Steevens  to  Collier,  who 
have  understood  and  quoted  him ;  and  have  commenced  a  reaction  in  liis 
favour.  Nevertheless,  it  has  come  to  pass,  that  Watson — singular  and  sweet 
Poet  though  he  \v  xs — the  author  too  of  ten  separately  printed  works,  besides 
others  which  never  came  to  the  press  :  that  this  remarkable  Poet  has  dis- 
appeared trom  the  ordinary  Literary  History  of  England. 

Among  assignable  reasons  tor  this  :  is  the  t'lnidity  or  incapacity  of  n:ost 
men  for  original  discrimination  and  appreciation;  and  for  the  bold  avo.\al  of  an 
unaccredited  Poet.  This  liability  nut  to  imderstand,  to  inflict  unintention- 
ally the  injury  of  neglect,  is  not  uncommon.  A  teacher  or  interpreter  seems 
ever  to  attend  on  the  works  of  i\.g  highe->t  literary  creators;  not  so  much 
from  flaws  in  genius  and  creative  power  ;  .as  fn>m  the  multiplicity  of  books,  or 
from  our  want  of  judgment,  or  from  our  hesitation  to  venture  an  adequate 
recognition  in  the  teeth  of  ignorance.  It  needed  Addison  to  point  out  the 
superlative  maje.-ty  of  Paradise  Lost:  and  Pope  had  to  teach  the  English 
Nation  the  grentness  of  Shakespeare.  Comparing  greater  with  smaller  things  ; 
there  is  need  for  some  one  to  call  attention  to  W.itson.  Let  us  join  together 
in  ascertaining  his  true  position  in  the  Story  of  English  Mind.  Let  us  re- 
s  ore  —  after  nearly  three  centuries  of  obliteration — his  name,  in  golden 
letters,  to  the  great  liead-RoU  of  the  acknov.ledgjd  Poets  of  Great  Britain. 

The  forgetfulness  of  Watson  is  strikingly  shown  by  the  way  in  which  his 
printed  works  have  perished.  No  Public  Library  can  pretend  to  a  complete 
set  of  them.  To  reproduce — as  far  as  they  can  nov/  be  reproduced— the  four 
works  here  reprinted  ;  recourse  has  been  obligatory  to  two  of  the  most  cele- 
brated private  colk-ctions  of  English  works  in  this  country,  those  at  Britwell 
and  Stand  Rectory  :  while  I  have  been  quite  unable  to  meet  with  the  Author's 
Antyntas,  his  trau'^lation  of  Coluthus,  or  his  Covi/>e?idiie?n  Memories  localis. 

Further,  in  the  FiKaro/J-Tadia  as  will  be  seen  below,  there  are  references 
to  works  by  Watson,  whicli  apparently  never  came  to  the  press  at  all.  These 
or  any  of  them,  if  still  in  existence,  have  yet  to  be  made  known.  It  would 
be  well  if  search  should  henceforward  be  made  after  these  and  other  imprinted 
compositions  that  were  possibly  written  by  Watson,  during  the  concluding 
ten  years  of  his  life. 

Under  all  these  circumstances;  it  is  a  matter  for  great  congratulation  that  we 
can  here  present  all  admirers  of  true  Poesy  with  four  of  Watson's  works,  one 
Latin,  and  three  English,  all  complete;  with  the  exception  of  two  leaves  in 
T/ie  Teares  of  Fancy,  unfortunately  wanting,  but  which,  it  is  to  be  hoped, 
with  a  higher  estimation  of  the  Poet  in  future  stimulating  the  search,  will  not 
be  lost  to  us  for  ever. 

What  we  now  desire,  Is  to  give — more  by  way  of  temporary  preface  than 
any  exhaustive  enquiry,  satisfying  all  reasonable  interest — a  short  sketch  of 
Watson's  ascertained  writings :  leaving  the  Texts  here  presented,  to  the 
study,  appreci.ation,  and  delight  of  every  Reader. 

To  Anthony-a-Wood's  account  of  his  Life,  we  can  add  but  little. 

Thomas  W.itson,  a  Londoner  born,  did  spend  some  time  in  this  university, 
not  in  logic  and  philosophy,  as  he  ought  to  have  done  ;  but  in  the  smooth  and 
pleasant  studies  of  poetry  and  romance,  whereby  he  obtained  an  honourable 
name  among  the  students  in  those  faculties.  Afterward  retiring  to  the  metro- 
polis, studied  at  common  law  at  riper  years.  \Meliboeus  and  AmititcE  Gaiidia 
arc  then  referred  to.]  He  hath  written  other  things  of  that  nature  or  strain, 
and  something  p-.rtaining  to  pastoral,  which  I  have  not  yet  seen,  and  was 
highly  valued  among  ingenious  men,  in  the  latter  end  of  Q.  Elizabeth.  Ath. 
Cxon.  i.  6oi.      Ed.  i>y  Bliss.  1813. 


4  SOME  ACCOUNT  OF   THE 

As  our  Poet  was  but  young  on  the  publication  of  his  Atiti^oiie  in  1581,  we 
may  guess  him  to  have  been  born  about  tlie  time  of  Queen  Elizabeth's  acces- 
sion in  1557,  and  consequently  dying  in  1592,  to  have  finished  his  career  in 
the  prime  of  life,  probably  between  forty  and  fifty  years  of  age.  His  publi- 
cations tell  us,  in  one  way  or  another,  that  he  was  of  gentle  blood  ;  born  in 
London;  educated  at  Oxford;  a  student  at  law,  probably  a  member  of  one 
of  the  Inns  of  Court ;  and  that  before  1581  he  sojourned  some  while  at  Paris, 
probably  associating  there  with  the.Walsingham  family.  In  his  Latin-English 
Eclogue  31elibcEHS,  he  puts  these  lines  into  the  mouth  of  Thomas  Walsingham 
(Tityrus) — Thy  tunes  have  often  pleas'd  mine  eare  of  yore, 

when  milk-white  swans  did  flocke  to  heare  the  sing, 
Where  Seane  in  Paris  makes  a  double  shore.  See  p.  157. 

He  appears  to  have  returned  to  England,  and  to  have  employed  some  part 
if  not  all  the  remaining  twelve  years  of  his  life,  in  the  study  of  poetry  and 
polite  literature  :  publishing  in  that  period  five  Latin  and  three  English  works, 
and  leaving,  without  all  doubt,  behind  him,  considerable  unpublished  pieces 
in  both  these  languages.  One  In  Latin,  A mi7ttce  G nVidia,  was  published  in 
1592,  immediately  after  his  death  :  and  The  Teares  of  Fancy  in  1593  :  others, 
we  know  from  the  ''EKaTO/Jiiradia,  to  have  been  far  proceeded  with  :  while 
some  few,  as  will  be  presently  seen,  did  actually  escape  to  light  in  Poetical 
Miscellanies  subsequently  published. 

Though  Watson  apparently  took  no  degree  at  Oxford,  he  must  have  been 
a  prodigious  Student  in  those  branches  of  knowledge  to  which  he  addicted 
himself  As  regards  languages,  Greek,  Latin,  Italian,  French,  with  his  own 
mother  tongue,  were  at  his  command.  He  made  himself  at  home  with  the 
entire  body  of  Greek  and  Latin  poets,  and  consequently  with  the  whole  ancient 
Pagan  mythology.  He  early  occupied  him.self  with  translating  Petrarch's 
Sonnets  from  the  Italian  into  Latin;  and  seems  to  have  delighted  in  many  of 
the  minor  Italian  poets  of  tliat  school.  William  Bird  and  he  first  published 
Madrigals  in  English.  With  the  works  of  Pierre  de  Ronsard,  Estienne 
FoRCADEL,  and  other  like  French  poets,  he  seems  also  to  have  been  familiar. 
Chaucer  is  referred  to  at  /.  41,  and  Spenser  magnified  in  the  beautiful 
Elegy  at/.  173.     So  varied  was  his  reading,  so  catholic  his  appreciation. 

He  wrote  at  first  and  chiefly  in  Latin,  then  the  speech  of  European  cul- 
ture ;  afterwards  and  possibly  to  a  less  degree  in  English.  In  connection 
with  this,  we  should  recollect  his  date.  Contemporary  with  Spenser  and 
Sidney,  and  rather  before  Shakespeare.  His  works  tell  us  of  his  aristocratic 
acquaintance,  Philip  Howard,  Earl  of  Arundel,  Edward  Vere,  Earl  of 
Oxford,  Sir  Philip  and  Lady  Mary  Sidney,  the  Walsingham  family, 
and  the  like  ;  and  also  of  his  hterary  friends,  such  as  W.  Camden,  J.  Lyly, 
M.  Roydon,  T.  Acheley,  G.  Peele,  who  complimented  him  in  verse  ;  as  well 
as  Spenser,  Whetstone  and  Ociclande  to  whom  he  rendered  like  tribute. 

We  now  come  to  Watson's  position  among  the  Englisli  poets  of  his  time.  If 
English  Imaginative  Poe.sy  were  classified,  it  might  group  under  three  classes. 
The  earliest  in  time — the  Allegorical — represented  by  Chaucer,  Gower,  Ste- 
phen Hawefi,  Spenser,  Giles  Fletcher,  and  others.  The  next  in  our  history 
— the  Amatory — brought  into  England  by  Henry  Howard,  Earl  cf  Surrey  and 
Sir  Thomas  Wyatt,  as  will  be  seen  in  our  approaching  Reprint  of  Tottel's  Mis- 
cellany.    The  Dramatic — represented  by  Shakespenre  and  a  host  of  others. 

Of  these  Watson  belongs  to  the  second  group  of  Writers.  He  is,  in  the 
History  of  our  Poesy,  a  lineal  successor  of  Surrey  and  Wyatt.  _  Among  all 
English  poems  published  during  his  lifetime,  his  English  poetical  works — 
if  an  opinion  might  be  ventured — should  rank  next  to  Spenser.  That  is,  he 
should  be  placed  before  Sidney  as  a  Poet.  Richard  Barnfield  in  his  Affec- 
tionate ShepJiearde,  1596,  In  upbraiding  Love,  thus  refers  to  them  all  three. 
By  thee  great  Collin  lost  his  libertie, 

By  thee  sweet  Astrophel  forwent  his  ioy; 
By  thee  Amyntas  wept  incessantly. 

They  are  all  equally  original;  each  writing  after  a  different  manner, 
yet  In'  power  of  gifts,  genius,  and  learning,  we  would  put  Spenser  first ; 
Watson,  second;  and  Sidney,  third.  Though  the  Amatory  group  of  Poets 
imitated  foreign  authors  more  largely  than  those  of  the  other  two  classes, 
yet  it  was  not  servilely  done.  Their  close  contact  with  some  of  the  best 
foreign  Poets  did  but  bring  out  the  good  that  was  In  themselves;  and  the 
reader  of  this  Reprint  will  recognize  in  it  some  very  choice  English  poetry. 


IVRITINGS  OF   THOMAS   W  A  T  S  0  y.       5 

We  have  now  tn  rhronicle  year  by  year,  such  scattered  notices  of  our  Poet 
a^  we  have  been  able  to  collect,  merely  expressing  a  hope  that  subsequent 
gleaners  will  be  able  to  add  much  n»ore  to  our  knowledge  of  him  and  his 
works.  We  shall  distinguish  by  (a)  (b^  (c^  &c.  such  additional  poems  by 
Watson  as  are  not  included  in  the  four  texts  here  reprinted. 

And  here  first,  we  must  notice  several  works  which  are  referred  to  in  The 
'EKaTO/JLiraOia. 

(a)  "  And  where  he  mentioneth  that  once  hee  scorned  lovie,  he  alludeth  to 
a  peece  of  worke,  whiche  he  wrote  long  since,  De  Remedio  Antoris,  which 
he  hath  lately  perfected,  to  the  good  likinge  of  many  that  hauc  seene  and 
perused  it,  though  not  fully  to  his  owne  fancy,  which  causeth  him  as  yet  to 
kepe  it  backe  from  the  printe." — ^S"^^'  I.,/.  37. 

(b)  "The  Authour  borroweth  from  certaine  Latine  verses  of  his  owne,  made 
long  agoe  vpon  the  loue  abuses  of  Iiippiter  in  a  certaine  peece  of  worke 
written  in  the  commendation  of  women  kinde  ;  which  he  hath  not  yet  wholie 
perfected  to  the  print." — See  LXXV.,  at^.  iii. 

(c)  The  annotation  to  VI.,  at/.  42,  begins  thus.  "  This  passion  is  a  trans- 
lation into  latine  of  the  selfe  same  sonnet  of  Petrarch  which  you  red  lastly 
alleaged.  and  commeth  somwhat  neerer  vnto  the  Italian  phrase  then  the  English 
doth.  'I'he  Author  when  he  translated  it,  was  not  then  minded  euer  to  haue 
imboldned  him  selfe  so  farre,  as  to  thrust  in  foote  amongst  our  english  Poets. 
But  beinge  busied  in  translating  Petrarch  his  sonnets  into  latin  new  clothed 
this  amongst  many  others,  which  one  day  may  perchance  come  to  light." 

(tJ)  TheLatin  verses  (7«;'(/y4;«<?r,  at/.  134,  "  which  because  they  may  well  im- 
porte  a  passion  of  the  writer,  and  aptly  befitte  the  present  title  of  his  ouerpassed 
Lone,  he  setteth  them  downe  in  this  next  page  following,  but  not  as  accompt- 
able  for  one  of  the  hundreth  passions  of  this  booke." — See  XCVIII. 

These,  and  possibly  other  like  completed  poems  in  Latin,  soon  circulated 
in  MS.  Stephen  Broelmann,  a  German  Jurist  and  Poet,  of  Cologne,  wrote 
to  Watson  while  he  was  at  Paris,  the  following  verses  (reprinted  before  the 
Antigone),  urging  him  to  print  his  works. 

Si  nostrae  tecum  precula;  Watsone,  valerent, 

Non  tua  tot  chartis  scrinia  plena  forent; 
Sub  praelo  tua  Musa  foret,  lucemque  viderent 

ludice  quae  Phaebo  candido  metra  facis. 
Atque  ego  si  quicquani  sapio,  nouique  Helicona, 

Carminis  ille  tui  e^t  ex  Helicone  liquor. 
Classica  siue  canis,  teneros  seu  dicis  amores, 

Mars  tumido,  tenui  carmine  gestit  amor. 
Thuscanus  Petrarcha  tuo  stat  carmine  diues : 

Mundo  vtinam  fieret  notior  ille  labor. 
Plebs  ignara  licet  Phaebeae  frondis  honores 
Negligat,  et  quicquid  clarius  esse  potest : 
Tu  tamen  a  doctis  doctus  dicere  Poeta, 

Inque  suo  precio  nobile  carmen  erit. 
Praesertim  Antigonen  vel  Zoilus  ipse  probabit, 

Ad  praelum  duci  si  paciaris  opus. 
Erg6  tuum  Celebris  portet  super  aethera  nomen 

Fama,  nee  in  tenebris  amplius  esse  sinat. 
Nkm  licet  es  iuuenis,  tamen  hand  iuuenilia  pangis, 

Et  vena  poUes,  ingenioque  bono. 
Ah  pudet  vlterius  iuuenum  laudare  senili 

Carmine,  quud  nostro  carmine  maior  eas. 
Eia  age  ;  percolito  dulces  ante  omnia  Musas: 

Vtilis  ille  labor,  dulcis  et  ille  labor. 
Sed  Venus  irata  est,  dimi  celas  carmen  amoris  : 

Phaebus  et  ipse  dolet,  dum  sua  dona  tegis. 
Si  semper  Danaen  tenuisset  ahaenea  turris, 
Aurea  non  essent  pondera  nota  louis. 
1581.  I.     We  now  come  to  Watson's  first  publication  ;  a  translation  into  Latin 
of  Sophocles'  Antigone  ;  thus  entered  by  the  clerk  of  the  Stationers' 
Company. 

"31  July  1581.    John  Wolfe.    Lycencenced  vnto  him,  &c.  Aphoclis 
Antigone,  Thoma  Watsono  interprete.     .     .     .     vj^." 
J.  P.  Collier.    Ext. from  Regs,  of  Stat.  Co.  ii.  149.    Ed.  1849. 


SOME  ACCOUNT  OF   THE 


Of  this  work,  there  is  a  copy  in  the  British  Museum.  [Press  mark, 
1070.  m.  31.]  The  title  runs  thus  :  "  SophocHs  Antigone,  hiterprcte 
Thoma  Watsono  J.V .  studioso.  Huic  adduntur  pompse  quaedam,  ex 
singuHs  Tragsediae  actis  deriuatse;  et  post  eas,  totidem  themata  sen- 
tentijs  refertissima  ;  eodem  Thoma  Watsono  Authore.  L  o  n- 
DiNi.     Excudebat  lohannes  Wolfius.     1581." 

As  his  earhest  known  pubhshed  poem,  and  his  own  account  of  his 
early  studies,  we  here  give  his  entire  Dedicatory  Epistle. 

(f)  Nobilissimo  proceri,  claroque  nuiltis  nominibus,  Philippo 
HowARDO  Comiti  Arundelise,  Thomas  Watsonvs  soiidam 
foelicitatem  precatur. 

NObilibr.s  proediues  auis,  virtutibus  aucte, 
Dotibus  Aonijs  nobilitate  Comes 
Accipe  tantilli  iuuenilia  carmina  vatis, 

Et  multi  mcnMcum  volue  laboris  opus. 
Nee  mea  Callimachi,  neque  Coi  Musa  Philcetoe  est : 

Quodque  ferat,  vulpes  nil  nisi  tegmen  habet. 
Sed  curant  hominum  mentes,  non  munera  Diui : 

Erg6  age,  coelitibus  par,  imitare  Deos. 
Quid  si  mendosus  fuerit  meus  iste  libellus  ? 

Quid  si  neglecto  carmine  culpa  subest  ? 
Candida  et  atra  suo  perlustrat  Cynthia  vultu  : 

Phoebus  adit  radijs  Candida  et  atra  suis. 
Vestraque  consueto  capiet  dementia  vultu, 

Quoe  sunt  in  versu  Candida  et  atra  meo. 
Marsioe,  Aiachnos,  Iri,  Smyntheus,  Tritonia,  Croesus, 

Cantus,  fila,  stipem,  postulat,  optat,  amat ; 
Cantus,  fila,  stipem,  Smyntheus,  Tritonia,  Croesus, 

Nee  dedignatur,  musicus,  alma,  potens. 
Tuque  mmora  meis  (recinit  si  vera  propellus) 

Carmina  carminibus  niuneris  instar  habes. 
Atque  ego  non  tanti  primosuos  duco  Poetas, 

Vt  nihil  in  nostris  laudibus  esse  velim. 
Forsitan  et  Phoebo,  fecique  volente  Minerua, 

Vnde  meo  partus  Marte  triumphus  eat. 
Tu  bene  si  censes,  ego  te  censore  beatus 

Apponam  stimulos  viribus  ipse  meis. 
Et  faciam  lostus  quod  multi  soepe  rogarunt, 

Plura  vt  sub  proeli  pondere  scripta  crepent. 
Ipse  licet  Momus  vano  submurmuret  ore, 

Inuidus  et  piceo  Zoilus  vngue  prem.at : 
ludicij  censura  tui  superabit  vtrumque, 

Et  capiti  ponet  laurea  serta  meo. 
Inde  satis  foelix,  dicar  tuus  esse  Poeta, 

Et  famulus  fieri  cum  Ganymede  louis. 
Scilicet  hoc  olim  coepi  sperare  lucellurn, 

Dum  studijs  totus  tenipora  prima  dedi  : 
Dumque  prociil  pairia  lustium  mediumque  peregi, 

Discere  diuersis  oedere  verba  sonis. 
Turn  satis  ItaUoe  linguas  moresque  notabam ; 

Et  linguam,  et  mores  Gallia  docta  tuos. 
Vt  potui,  colui  Musas,  quocunque  ferebar  : 

Charus  et  imprimis  lustinianus  erat. 
Soepe  sed  inuitam  turbauit  Pallada  Mauors, 

Scepe  meo  sliidlo  bella  fuere  moroe. 
Castra  tamen  fiigi,  nisi  quoe  Phoebela  castra 

Cum  Musis  Charites  ccntinuere  pias. 
Bartole  magnus  eras,  neque  circumferre  licebat, 

Nee  legum  nodos  Balde  diserte  tuos  ; 
Arripui  Sophoclem,  docui  mitescere  Musas  : 

E  Groscis  prepigi  metra  Latina  modis. 
Taliter  absumens  turbatus  vtilis  horas, 

Antigonen  docui  verba  Latina  loqui. 
Momenti  res  magna,  meis  quoque  viribus  impar, 

Ni  daret  ipsa  niihi  sedula  Pallas  opcm. 


nRITIiVGS   OF   THOMAS    IVAl'SOX.       7 

Tandem  opus  exactum  volui  laccrare,  vel  igni 

Trudere,  quud  Latio  Gra;cia  maior  erat. 
Pluriiua  sed  vetuit  prudentum  turba  Viforum  : 

Me  siiniil  Eiilogijs  concelcbrare  suis. 
Inde  rudes  iteriiin  coepi  limare  camcenas, 

Et  inagis  interna  consolidare  inanu. 
lum  quccrcndus  erat,  mihi  qui  Patronus  adessct, 

Et  mca  qui  togeret  nuinine  scripta  suo  ; 
Qui  Phoebo  charus,  Musis  qui  charus  alumnus 

Esset,  et  Aonij  fontis  amaret  aquas  ; 
Qui  Claris  ortus  proauis,  pietatis  amicus 

Esset,  et  ipsius  Candida  cura  louis  ; 
Tu  quia  talis  eris,  et  niascid.igloria  regni, 

Supplice  Mceccenas  voce  vocandus  eras. 
Ergo  taniilli  non  aspernare  clientis, 

Quod  tua  iim  virtus  sola  proposcit,  opus. 
Fabula  trita,  olim  murem  fecisse,  Leoni 

Quod  satis  acceptum,  quodque  salubre  fuit. 
Quimuis  indignus,  quamuis  ignotus  adesset, 

Sumpsit  ab  iiifirmo  paupere  Pyrrhus  aquam. 
Sic  mihi  sit  facilis  cultura  potentis  aniici, 

Sim  licet  ignotus,  nee  meruisse  queam. 
Velle  meum  pro  posse  datur,  pro  munere  carmen, 

Et  cupit  Antigone  charior  esse  tibi. 
Charior  esse  tibi  sperat,  quam  chara  Creonti, 

Quam  fuerit  patrio  vel  peramata  solo, 
lamque  reuiuisctns,  et  Musis  ducta  Latinis 

Hue  venit,  et  Thoebis  amplius  esse  timet. 
Mira  tibi  referet,  si  vis  miracula  nosse: 

Atque  piura  faceret,  ni  plus  ante  fores. 
Illicitam  legem  tumidis  mordebit  lambis  ; 

Fascibus  impauido,  prceferet  ore  Deos; 
Turn  quid  sit  pulchrum,  quid  turpe,  quid  vtile,  quid  non, 

Dicet :  et  imperij  quam  sit  amarus  amor ; 
Quam  noceat  veri  monitus  contemnere  vatis  : 

Quam  vertat  celerem  Sors  malesana  rotam ; 
Principis  et  placitum  quam  pendula  turba  sequatur, 

Et  quanti  faciant  coetera  membra  caput. 
Hsec,  et  plura  tuis  plane  prccfiget  ocellis 

Antigone,  studio  docta  docere  meo. 
Viue,  vale  Generose  Comes  :  quot  scecula  ceruus 

Viuit,  tot  foelix  ssscula  viue :  vale. 
Vestri  hofioris  obseruatitissijiius,  T/totnas  IVatsoHus  Londonieiisis. 

(f )  The  PotnpcE^rc  four  groups  of  impersonations  such  as  Iustitia, 
cum  sceptro.  I. M  pi  etas,  vir  cum  inncrone.  Sec,  in  short  poems  too 
numerous  to  quote  here ;  and  are  preceded  by  this  second  dedica- 
tion to  Lord  Howard  of  Arundell. 

Hoec  mea  si  quicquam  placuit  translatio,  Comes 

Inclyte;  materies  aut  bona  si  qua  subest : 
Hjcc  mea  pompa  simul  positque  legenti, 

Quam  totani  Antigones  fabula  trislis  habet. 
Insuper  apposui  pompis,  quae  digna  notatu, 

Themata ;  quoeque  probes  vtilitate  sua. 
Tu  dignare  igitur  vultu  lustrare  benigno, 

Quod  dedit  igiif»ti  Musa  benigna  viri. 

Vestri  honoris  shidiosisivuts  Tlio.  Watsomcs. 

(g)  The  four  Theviata  "diducted  out  of  the  bowelles  oi  Antigone 
in  Soplwcles  (which  he  lately  translated  into  Latine  and  published  in 
print." — See  p.  115)  are  apparently  exercises  in  different  kinds  of 
Latin  verse.     They  are  severally  as  follows  : — 

(1)  Ccpcain  phiUintian  niultnrnin  calamitatuin,  cmisam  esse^  ex 
Creontis  exei7iplo  discinnts,  written  in  Iambics. 

(2)  Quam  sit  malum  pid-lico  Magistral  us  edicto  ndnpartre,  A  nti- 
goiice  exetnpluvi  docet,  written  in  Anaps^stic  Dimitcrs. 


8  SOME  ACCOUNT  OF   THE 

(31  QucE  corrigere  non  J>ossunnes,  ea  attentnre  nS  vcliiiius  docei 
Is7iieiie,  vitcB  qnietcEforinaju  tradefis,  written  in  Sapphics. 

(4)  Ainare  sirmd et  snpe7e  vix  cuiquam  dart,  inte^-ittis  Haenionis 
docet,  written  in  Choriambic  Asclep'adean  verse.  The  3rd,  4th  ;  8th, 
Qth,  and  loth  lines  of  this  Thema  are  quoted  at/.  115. 

To  this  work  among  others  W.  Camden  contributed  the  following 
lines.  M.  Thoina  Watsoni  Antigoneii. 

ANe  Sophoclgeo  Genio  fas  laude  litare? 
Fas  est  thure  Deo,  laude  litare  viro. 
Turn  Watsone  tibi  victura  laude  litandum _: 
Laus  tua  sitque  tibi  quod  sua  thura  loui. 
Namque  Sophoclseus  Genius  tibi  mente  receptus 

Insidet,  Ausonium  seque  subinde  stupet. 
Antigonem  quicunque  legit,  sic  iudicat ;  illam 

Qui  leget,  relegit :  quique  relegit  amat. 
Vnus  in  alterutro  Genius  sic  emiaet,  vno 

Alterutro,  Tragicis  vnus  vterque  modis. 
Perculit  ille  suis  numeris  Orchestra  Pelasg^lm, 

Tu  pompis  Latiis  nostra  Theatra  quatis. 
Verba  illi  Grseco,  vernant  tibi  flore  latino, 

Venaque  dicendi  diues  vtrique  fluit. 
Sed  tibi  quid  laudes  vena  de  paupere  promo  ? 

Sic  solem  fumis  irradiare  paro. 
En  victura  comus  Phsebi  tibi  laurus  obumbret. 
Et  decus  hoc  minus  est,  quam  meruisse  decus. 
Soon  after  the  appearance  of  the  Antigone,  Watson  must  have 
summoned  up  courage  to  '  thrust  in  foote  among  our  English  Poets.' 
George  Peele  refers  to 

These  layes  oi  Loue,  as  myrth  to  melancholic 
To  follow  fast  thy  sad  ^w^z^^^w^'.  _         See  p.  -^t. 

1582.       (t)  The  earliest  printed  English  verses  by  Watson  with  which  I  am 
acquainted,  are  the  following  prefixed  to  G.  Whetstone's  Heptameron 
of  Ciuill  Discourses,  %ic.     [E7it.  Stat.  Hall,  11  ^an.  is^'^-'^ 
T.  W.  Esquier,  In  the  commendation  of  the  Azicthor,  and  his 
needefnll  Booke. 

EVen  as  the  fruictfull  Bee,  doth  from  a  thousand  Flowers, 
Sweet  Honie  draine,  and  layes  it  vp,  to  make  the  profit  ours 
So,  Moral!  Whetstone,  to  his  Countrey  doth  impart, 
A  Worke  of  worth,  culd  from  ye  wise,  with  ludgement,  wit  and  art 
No  Stage  Toy,  he  sets  foorth,  or  thundring  of  an  Hoast, 
But  his  rare  Miise,  a  passage  makes,  twl.xt  burnyng  fier  and  frost 
Suche  Vertues  as  beseeme,  the  worthy  Gentles  breast. 
In  proper  colours  he  doth  blaze,  by  foUowyng  of  the  best : 
The  Vertue  is  but  rare,  and  Vice  not  yet  in  vse. 
That  modestly  he  not  commends,  or  mildely  shewes  th'  abuse 
Such  matter  in  good  wordes,  these  few  leaues  doo  reueale, 
Vnforst,  or  strainde,  as  yat  it  seemes,  a  naturall  common  weale. 
Qi forced  Marriage,  he  dooth  shew  the  foule  euent, 
When  Parents  ioyne,  the  Childrens  hands,  before  their  harts  consent 
And  how  these  fortunes  eke,  in  wedlock  seeldom  proue, 
Vnequall  choice,  in  birth,  in  yeeres  :  and  Childrens  hasty  loue. 
Yet  he  with  learned  prooffes,  this  sacred  state  dooth  raise, 
(As  it  deserues)  aboue  the  Skies,  in  wordes  of  modest  praise. 
More,  euery  Page,  heere  doth  present,  the  Readers  eyes, 
With  such  regardes,  as  help  the  weake,  and  doo  confirm  ye  wise. 
Which  needelesse  were,  to  blase,  in  prayses  to  allure  : 
The  holy  Bush,  may  ivel  be  sparde,  where  as  the  Wine  is  pure. 
II.      Watson  must  have  contributed  these  verses,  about  the  time  he 
was  finishing  a  number   of   English   poems,    comprising  a  portion 
of  those  forming,  with  the  three  Latin  ones.  The  Passionate  Centurie 
[i.e.  Hundred  Songs]  of  Loue  ;  of  which,  as  he  tells  us  at  /.  25,  the 
Earl  uf  Oxford  '  willinglie  voutsafed  the  acceptance. '     And  '  since  the 
world  hath  vnderstood  (I  know  not  how)  that  your  Honor  willinglie 
voutchsafed  the  acceptance  of  this  worke,  and  at  conuenient  leisures 
fauorablie  perused  it,  being  as  yet  but  in  written  hande,  many  haue 


\  i 


WRITINGS   OF   THOMAS    ITATSOAT.       9 

oftentimes  and  ernestly  called  NTJon  mee  to  put  it  to  the  presse,  that 
for  their  moiiy  they  might  but  see,  what  your  Lordship  with  some 
liking  hathalreadie  perused.'—/.  25. 

Wat.son  spontaneously  wrote  these  poems  without  much  definite 
purpose  as  to  number.  Ihat  the  title  of  the  book  was  the  last  thing 
thought  of,  is  proved  by  the  interposition  in  the  '  Centurie'  of  three 
Latin  poems;  one,  No.  VL,  being  part  of  the  Latin  version  of 
Petrarch's  sonnets  above  referred  to,  and  another,  No.  XLV. ,  *  when 
he  compiled'  '  he  thought  not  to  haue  placed  among  these  his  Eng- 
lish toyes;'  also  by  his  composition  of  an  additional  poem.  No. 
LXVIL,  while  the  work  was  at  the  press  [?in  honour  of  the  Earl  of 
Oxford]  ;  with  the  cor<;equent  thrusting  out  of  the  *  Centurie '  of 
another  Latin  poem  Quid  Amor,  possibly  in  the  first  instance  in- 
cluding in  it.      In  this  way  the  '  EKaTOUTra^i'a  was  built  up. 

We  take  it  that  Watson  in  the  ceaseless  activity  of  his  mind,  com- 
posed as  subjects  suggested  themselves  to  him  in  his  multifarious 
reading.  Whether  in  these  youthful  days,  unrequited  affection  turned 
him  to  amatory  poetry;  whether  there  was  any  foundation  in  his 
life  for  these  Love-Songs  and  Love-Dirges,  we  do  not  know. 

He  tells  us,  at  /.  27,  he  wrote  this  work  more  for  Poetry  than 
Passion.  '  Yet  for  this  once  I  hope  thou  wilt  in  respect  of  my  tra- 
uaile  in  penning  these  loue  passions,  or  for  pitie  of  my  paines  in 
.suffering  them  (although  but  supposed^*  .  .  .  And  it  is  quite 
true  as  he  states  at/.  28,  '  that  although  Venus  be  my  verse,  yet  her 
slipper  is  left  out.'  So  that,  as  these  four  works  fully  show,  he  is  one 
of  the  purest  as  he  is  one  of  the  sweetest  of  our  Poets. 

Though  there  is  no  date  in  it,  the  'E/carOyUTra^ia  was  published 
in  1582.     The  registration  entry  of  it  runs  thus — 

"31  Mar.  1582.     Mr.  Cawoode.     Licenced  to  him,  &c.,  Watsons 

Passions,  manifestinge  the  true  frenzy  of  loue vj"!." 

J.  P.  Collier.  Ext.  from  Regs,  of  Stat.  Co.  it.  162.  Ed.  1849. 
Whoever  reads  this  remarkable  work  will  wonder  how  it  could  have  fallen 
into  such  ol'livion.  On  the  poems  themselves  we  shall  here  say  nothing. 
They  reveal  themselves.  Each  of  them  is  headed  with  an  'annotation.'  To 
these  short  introductions  we  would  call  attention.  They  are  most  skilfully 
written.  Who  wrote  them?  Who  was  the  Annotator  ?  May  he  have  been 
the  Earl  of  Oxford  ?  Was  he  the  friend,  whom  Watson  addre.sses  in  No. 
LXXL,  as  Deere  Titus  mine,  my  auncient  frend  ? 

Or  was  he  the  author  himself,  writing  in  the  third  person  ?  We  cannot  say. 
Whoever  he  were,  he  was  perfectly  informed — certainly  by  the  Poet  himself 
— as  to  every  allusion  made,  every  Author  imitated  or  referred  to. 

The  object  of  these  annotations  is  stated  in  them.  They  were  written 
to  bring  Watson's  erudite  verse  to  the  appreciation  '  of  him  that  is  no  great 
clarke.'  /.  83.  'That  the  vulgar  may  the  better  vnderstand  this  Passion,  I 
will  briefly  touch  those,  whom  the  Authour  namcth  herein,'  /.  98.  '  Where- 
f  re  know  they  which  know  it  not  alreadie,'/.  128.  '  Yet  the  vnlearned  may 
haue  this  hclpe  geuen  them  by  the  way  to  know  what  Gnlaxia  is,  or  Facto- 
lits,  which  perchaunce  they  haue  not  read  often  in  our  vulgar  Rimes,'/.  67. 

Though  they  failed  in  their  attempt  to  popularize  the  book  :  these  annota- 
tions show  us  the  vast  learning  of  our  Author.  They  also  introduce  us  to 
f  ;reign  poets  utterly  unknown  to  cultivated  Englishmen  of  the  present  day. 
May  we  here  venture  to  suggest  to  the  numerous  verse-translators  of  our 
time,  the  benefit  of  varying  their  ceaseless  translation  of  the  same  ancient 
classics  with  versions  of  the  Latin  or  vernacular  verse  of  the  i6th  century. 
May  the  testimony  of  Watson's  friend,  the  Annotator;  which  is  virtually  thit 
of  Watson  himself,  be  put  in  evidence  respecting  these.  He  refers  to  '  the 
works  of  Hercules  Strozza,  who  in  his  Somuiuni  hath  written  so  exquisitely, 
that  the  Dreame  will  quite  his  trauaile,  that  shall  peruse  it  with  due  atten- 
tion,'/. 68  :  describing  as  '  a  noble  man  of  Italy,  and  one  of  the  best  Poets 
in  all  his  age,'/  121.  Or  Est.enne  Forcadel,  to  whom  he  refers  under  his 
latinized  name  of  '  Stephanns  Forcatultcs  (an  excellent  Ciuilian,  and  one  of 
the  beste  Poetes  of  Fraunce  for  these  many  yeares),'/.  74.  And  so  on,  of  all 
the  rest.  Thee  ai-notations  may  well  be  made  a  starting  point  of  enquiry  in 
the  Imaginative  Poesy  of  Europe  at  that  time  ;  which  being  now  forgotten, 
would  by  recovery  become  new  again. 


ro 


SOME  ACCOUNT  OF   THE 


Harl.  MS.  3277.  is  a  copy,  in  the  handwriting  of  the  end  of  the  sixteenth 
century,  of  the  greater  part  of  the'E/caro/XTra^i'a  under  the  following  title. 

A  Looking glasse  for  Louers ;  Wherein  are  couteyned  tzvo  sories  0/ amor' 

ous passions :  the  07ie  expressing  the  trewe  estate  atid perturbations  0/ hy)n, 

that  is  overgon  with  lotie:  the  other,  ajlatt  dj/yance  to  ioice  and  all  his  iazvcs. 

The  first  half  hundred  poems  are  all  transcribed:  but  in  the  second,  there 

are  many  omissions. 

1582.  Christopher  OcKLANDE,  Headmaster  first  of  tlie  School  founded 
by  Queen  Elizabeth  at  Southwark,  afterwards  of  Cheltenham  School,  wrote  a 
Latin  poem  '  KiprjuapKca  5//^^  Elizabetha,' of  which  two  editions  appeared 
this  year  at  the  end  of  a  work  entitled  Atigloi'iun  prxlia,  &c.  This  work 
was  ordered  on  7  May  1582  by  the  High  Commission  '  too  bee  receyued 
and  publiquely  read  and  taught  in  all  Grammar  and  Free  Scholes.'  To  this 
work  Watson  contributed  the  following  Decastichon : 

(i)  Ad  Oclandum,  de  Eulogiis  serinissimcE  nostrce  ElizahethcE post  A nglo- 
rum  pralia  cantatis. 

Recte  post  Martis  lituos  pacalis  Oliua 

buggeritur  calamo  cane  Poeta  tuo. 
Scilicet,  vt  feruens  Martem  laudauerat  setas, 

Palladis  expetiit  ramus  habere  senem. 
Et  Martis  lituos  ornas,  virgamque  Mineruse 

Grandia  siue  canis,  dulcia  sine  canis. 
Sen  pacem,  seu  bellum  refers,  in  vtraque  camocna 

Vel  Deus  exprimitur,  vel  Dea  maior  eo. 
At  mihi  si  credes,  cantus  imitabere  Cygni, 

P'uneris  vt  sit  laus  Elisabetha  X.\x\..—Tho7nas  Watsoniis. 

1585.  in.  "  Atnyntas.     Thomss  Watsoni  I.V.  studiosi.     Excudebat  Henri- 

cus  Marsh,  ex  assignatione  'I'homse  Marsh.  1585.  i6mo,  27  leaves. 
Dedicated  to  'Henrico  Noello.'" — Lorvndes,  p.  2856.  [Sitice  the 
Jirst  Impression  of  this  Reprifit,  a  copy  ^  Amyntas  has  been  pointed 
out  to  7ne  in  the  British  Museum,  Press  Mark  1213  d.  5.] 

The  next  two  works  we  have  not  seen;  we  can  but  quote  them. 
?  IV.  Compendiicm  Memorice  Localis  (Autore  Thoma  Watsoni  Londini 
ensi  J.  V.  studioso.)  Dedicated  to  '  Henrico  Noello  vere  nobil- 
viro.'  A  copy  of  this  work  was  sold  in  1831  at  Heber's  sale.  Part 
vi.  3800  :  '  but,  as  it  was  imperfect  at  the  end  the  date  and  printer 
are  unknown.'  —J.  P.  Collier,  Bib.  Cat.  ii.  490. 

We  place  it  here  on  account  of  its  Dedicatee  being  the  same. 

1586.  V.    "  Coluthus'  RaptcE  Helence.    Tho.  Watsona;  Londinensi.    London 

1586.  4to.  Dedicatedto  the  Duke  of  Northumberland.  '  Z.£'7£/;/./.  50  j. 

In  a  MS.  volume,  transcribed\)y  '^(A'xri  Lilliat,  formerly  in  Hearne's 
possession,  now  among  Dr.  Rawlinson's  collection  in  the  Bodleian 
MSS.  Rawl.  Poet.  148:  are  the  following  lines,  which  we  reprint 
from  Brit.  Bibli.  ii.  543.     Ed.  1812. 

(k)  "  A  gratification  vnto  Mr.  foJin  Case,  for  his  learned  Booke, 
laijly  made  in  the  prayes  of  Alusick. 

1.  Let  others  praies  what  likes  them  best, 
I  like  his  lynes  aboue  the  rest. 

Whose  pen  hath  pay n ted  Musicks  praies  : 
By  nature's  lawe  by  wisdomes  rule, 
He  soundly  blames  the  scencelesse  foole. 
And  barb'rous  Scithian  of  our  dayes. 

2.  He  writes  of  angels  harmony, 
Aboue  the  harpe  of  Mercnrie 

He  writes  of  sweetly  turninge  spears  : 
How  birds  and  beasts,  and  worines  reioyce, 
How  dolphins  lou'd  A  rions  voyce, 
He  makes  a  frame  for  Midas  ears. 

3.  Then  may  the  solemne  stoicke  finde, 
That  Momns  and  hiin  self  ar  bljmde, 
And  that  rude  Marsia  wanteth  skill : 
Whiles  will  and  witlesse  ears  are  bent, 
Against  Apollo's  sweet  consent, 

The  nursse  of  good,  ye  scourge  of  ill. 


jr/^  I  TIN  GS  OF   TH  0  MA  S    IT  A  TS  0  A'      1 1 

4.     Let  Eris  then  delight  in  warrs, 
Let  Enuy  barke  against  the  Starrs, 
Let  Folly  sayle  which  may  thee  please: 
With  him  I  wish  my  dayes  to  spende 
Whose  quill  hath  stood  fayre  A/ttsuAs  friend, 
Chief  friend  to  peace,  chief  port  of  ease,     q*  The.  Watson." 

1587.  Abraham  Frat-nce,  a  versifier,  published  this  year  "  T/ie  La- 

mentations 0/  Atnyntas  for  tlu  death  of  PhiUis,  paraphrastically 
translated  out  of  Latine  into  English  Hexameters  by  Abraham 
Fraunce.  London,  15S7."  Of  this  work  there  is  a  copy  in  the 
Bodleian  Library.  For  it,  Fraunce  wrote  the  following  dishonest 
dedication,  in  which  he  makes  no  allusion  whatever  to  Watson. 
To  tli€  Right  Honoi'rable,  vertnous  and  learned  Ladie,  tlie  Ladie 
Mary,  Coiintesse  o/ Penbroke. 

Mine  afflicted  mind  and  erased  bodie,  together  with  other  extemall  cala- 
mities haue  wrought  such  sorowfull  and  lamentable  effects  in  me, 
that  for  this  whole  yeare  I  haue  wholy  giuen  ouer  my  selfe  to  mournfull 
meditations.  Among  others,  Amintas  is  one,  which  being  first  prepared  for 
oiie  or  two,  was  afterwards  by  the  meanes  of  a  few,  made  common  to  manie, 
and  so  pitifullv  disfigured  by  the  boisterous  handling  of  vnskilful  pen  men, 
t*i.it  he  was  like  to  haue  come  abroad  so  vnlike  himselfe,  as  that  his  own 
PhiUis  would  neuer  haue  taken  him  for  Amintas.  Which  vtter  vndoing  of 
our  poore  shepeheard,  I  knew  not  well  otherwise  how  to  preuent,  but  by 
repairing  his  ragged  attire,  to  let  him  passe  for  a  time  vnder  your  honour- 
able protection.  As  for  his  foes,  they  either  generallie  niislike  this  vnusuall 
kind  of  verse,  or  els  they  fancie  not  my  peculier  trauaile.  For  the  first,  I 
neuer  heard  better  argument  of  them  then  this,  such  an  one  hath  done  but 
ill,  therefore  no  man  can  doe  wel,  which  reason  is  much  like  their  own  rimes, 
ifj  condemning  the  art,  for  the  fault  of  some  artificers.  Now  for  the  second 
sort  of  reprehenders  who  think  well  of  the  thing,  but  not  of  my  labour  therein, 
mine  answere  is  at  hand.  If  there  were  any  penaltie  appointed  for  him  that 
would  not  reade,  he  might  well  complaine  of  me  that  publish  it  to  be  read. 
But  if  it  be  in  euerie  mans  choise  to  reade  it,  or  not  to  reade,  why  then  not 
in  mine  also  to  publish  or  not  to  publish  it?  He  that  will,  let  him  see  and 
reade  ;  he  that  will  neither  reade  nor  see,  is  neither  bound  to  see  nor  read. 
He  that  taketh  no  delight  in  reading,  let  him  thinke  that  among  so  manie 
men  so  diuersly  afTected,  there  may  be  some  found  of  a  contrarie  humor. 
If  anie  begin  to  read,  when  he  beginneth  to  take  no  delight,  let  him  leaue 
and  goe  no  further.  If  he  folow  on  in  reading  without  pleasure,  let  him 
neither  blame  me  that  did  what  I  could,  nor  be  angrie  with  the  thing  which 
hath  no  sense,  but  reprehend  himselfe  who  would  continue  reading  without 
any  pleasure  taking.     Your  honours  most  affectionat,  Abraham  Fraunce. 

Air.  Collier,  Bib.  Cat.  i.  296,  has  the  following.  '*  Ritson  {^B.  P.  />.  241) 
gives  the  date  of  this  work  as  1588,  adding  that  it  was  printed  by  Charlcy- 
woud ;  this  was  in  fact,  the  second  impression  ;  and,  although  it  has  never 
been  mentioned,  there  was  a  third  in  1589,  professing  to  have  been  'newly  cc^r- 
rected.'   It  was  then  '  Printed  by  Robert  Robinson'  for  Newman  and  Gubbin." 

1589.  fl)  Thomas  Nash,  writing  To  the  Gp7itlemen  Students  of  both 

Vniucrsities,  in  Green's  J/f«rt/'A<?«,  has  the  following  curious  passage. 
But  fortune  the  Mistres  of  chaiige  with  a  pitying  compassion,  respecting 
Master  Stanihursts  praise,  would  that  Phaer  shoulde  fall  that  hee  might 
rise,  whose  heroicall  Poetrie  infircd,    I  should  say  inspired,  with  an  hexa- 
meter fune,  recalled  to  life,  what  euer  hissed  barbarisme,  hath  bin  buried  this 
hundred  yeare ;  and  reuiued   by  his  rugged  quill,  such  carterlie  varietie,  as 
no  hodge  plowman  in  a  countrie,  but  would  haue  held  as  the  extremitie  of 
clownerie  ;  a  pattcrne  whereof,  I  will  propounde  to  your  iudgements,  as  neere 
as  I  can,  being  parte  of  one  of  his  descriptions  of  a  tempest,  which  is  thus. 
Then  did  he  make,  heavens  vault  to  reboiinde,  ivith  roirnce  robble  hobble 
Of  ruffe  raffe  roaring,  7i'ith  thiuick  thwack  thtirlery  bouncing. 
Which  straunge  language  of  the  firmament  neuer  suhiect  before  to  our  com- 
mon phra.se,  makes  vs  that  are  not  v.sed  to  terminate  heauensmoueings,  in  the 
accents  of  any  voice,  esteeme  of  their  triobulare  interpreter,  as  of  some 
Thrasionicall  huffe  snuffe,  for  so  terrible  was  his  stile,  to  all  milde  eares,  as 


12  SOME  ACCOUNT  OF   THE 

would  haiie  affrighted  our  peaceable  Poets,  from  intermedling  hereafter,  with 
that  quarelling  kinde  of  verse;  had  not  sweete  Master  Fraiice  by  his  excel- 
lent translation  of  Master  Thomas  IVatsons  sugred  Amhitas,  animated 
their  dulled  spirits,  to  such  high  witted  endeuors.  .  .  . 

In  trueth,  (Master  Watso7i  except,  whom  I  mentioned  before)  Iknowenot 
almost  any  of  late  dayes  that  hath  shewed  himselfe  singular  in  any  speciall 
Latine  Poem,  whose  Avniitas,  and  translated  Antigone  may  march  in  equi- 
page of  honour,  with  any  of  our  ancient  Poets. 

15S9*         Robert  Greene's '  Ciceronis  Amor,  Tullies  Love,'  was  first  published 
this  year.      Among  other  verse  placed  before  the  text :  is  Ad  Lee- 
torem  Hexasticon  :  which  runs  thus  in  the  earliest  edition,  1597,  to 
which  I  have  had  access. 
(I)  In  lucem  prodit  tenebris  exuta  mallgnis 

Romelei  petulans,  vsesanaque  flammula  Phoebi : 
Rorantem  Authori  (Lectores)  spargite  florem, 
Intyba,  Narcissos,  Latacen,  pictique  roseti 
Dulces  diuitias  :  Ilium  concingite  lauru ; 

Emerito  solers  industria  reddat  honorem.   Thomas  Watson,  Oxon. 
15S0.  VI.  This  was  a  prolific  year  for  Watson.    (1)  There  appeared  "^  The 
first  sett.  Of  Italian  Madrigalls  Englished,  not  to  the  sense  of  the 
(jriginall  dittie,  but  after  the  affection  of  the  noate.      By  Thomas 
Watson  Gentleman.     There  are  also  heere  inserted  two  excellent 
madrigalls  of  Master  William   Byrds,   composed  after  the  Italian 
vaine  at  the  request  of  the  sayd  Thomas  Watson.     London  1590." 
[British  Museimt.     Press  mark,  C.  130.] 
This  work,  Watson  thus  dedicated  to  Lord  Essex. 
Clarisimo,    et    honoratissimo    Heroi,    Domino    Roberto    Deurox 
Comiti  Essexiae,  Georgiani  Ordinis  Equiti  aurato,   multisque  alijs 
nominibus  illustrissimo.     S.  P. 

(m)  T  Nclyte  Mauortis,  Musarum  dulcis  alumne, 
J.  Accipe  iuncta  Italis  Anglia  verba  notis  : 
Atque  Marenzseos  cantus,  quos  approbet  auris 

Attica,  quos  Charites,  quosque  DIANA  velit. 
Si  rudius  quid  inest,  id  nostri  culpa  laboris  : 

Et  melior  primo  forte  secundus  erit. 
Altamen  Hesperioe  Philomenlce  aubdere  voces 

Non  est  exigui  debile  Martis  opus. 
Tu  dignare,  precor,  sinceroe  munera  mentis, 

Siue  sonent  placido  murmure,  siue  graui. 
Candida  et  atra  suo  percurrit  lumine  Phoebus  : 
Candida  et  atra  volens  accipe,  Phosbus  eris. 
Phoebus  eris,  nisi  te  sacrato  culmine  Mauors 

Auferat,  armipotens  vt  fera  bella  geras. 
Ecquis  ei».im  vestros  nescit  conamina  Musoe, 

Metraque  ad  Aoniam  soepe  canenda  lyram  ? 
Sed  mitto  quoscunque  tuoe  virtutis  honores  : 

Maior  es  eulogijs,  carminibusque  meis. 
Aurea  concedat  foelicis  tempora  vitae 
Jupiter,  et  coeptis  nolit  abesse  tuis. 

Honoris  tui  studiosissimus  Thomas  Watsonus. 
He  also  wrote  the  following  of  the  celebrated  Italian  composer. 
Lucae  Marenzio  Musicae  artis  peritis.simo  'I'ho.  Watsonus. 
(n)    T  T  Ei.  quoties  morimur  nimia  dulcedine  rapti, 
iTl      Pulsat  Appollineam  dum  tua  Musa  chelyn? 
O,  igitur  dulcis  plectrum  depone  Marenzi  : 

Ne  sit  laesa  tuis  plurima  vita  sonis. 
Attamen  6  dulcis  plectro  modulare  Marenzi : 
Si  morimur,  vitam  dant  tua  plectra  nouani. 
O  liceat  nobis,  vita  sub  morte  reperta, 

Ssep6  tuo  cantu  viuere,  saepe  mori. 
Mille  neces  patior,  vitas  totidemque  :  resumo, 

Dum  tua  multiplici  gutture  musa  placet : 
Somnio  septeno  gyrantes  murmure  sp'r.a;ras: 
Somnio  cantantis  Numina  blanda  s.di 


U'KJT/XGS  OF   7  HO  MAS    W  A  T  S  0  X.     13 

Somnio  Threiceum  Cytharoedam  saxa  mouentem : 

Somnio  mulcentem  carmine  monstra  Deuin  : 
Somnio  Musarum  conccntus  protiniis  omnes  : 
Omnio  Marenzi,  diim  canis,  vnus  habes. 
VII.      (2)  He  also  produced  Melibacus,  here  reprinted  on  the  et<en  num- 
bered//, from  139-174.    'Ihe  British  Museum  copy  [Pre.ss  mark  1070. 
1.  4]  has  the  top  of  the  Latin  dedic.uii)n,  see/.  142,  torn  :  and  we  are 
indebted  to  the  kindness  of  Rev.    I".  Corser  for  its  completion,  from 
the  copy  in  his  fanned  collection  at  Stand  Rectory,  near  Manchester. 
VIII.     (3)  An  Eglogue,  Sec,  being  a  translation  of  the  same  into  English  : 
here  reprinted  on  opposite  p.iges  to  the  Mi-lil>aiis.    Watson  distinctly 
refers  to  Fraunce's  unhand-;oine  conduct,  when  he  says  at/.  147,  '  1 
interpret  my  self,  le»t  Melibxus  in  speaking  English  by  an  other 
mans  labour,  should  leese  my  name  in  his  chaunge,  as  my  Amyntas 
did.'     [Brit.  Mus.  Press-mark  161.  m.  56. 1 

1591.  Fraunce  prints  for  the  fourth  time  his  translation  under  the  title  of 
''The  Couutcsse  0/ Pemhokes  \'nychnrch.  Contaming  the  affec- 
tionate life,  and  unfortunate  death  of.Phillis  and  Amynias  :  Ihat  in 
a  Pastorall:  This  in  a  Funerall :  b  ith  in  English  Hexameters.  By 
Abraham  Fraunce.     London  i^yi."     Its  registration  runs  thus  : 

"  9  Feb.  1591.  W™.  Ponsonbye.  Entred  for  his  copie,  &c.  A  booke 
intituled  theCountesseof /V«/^rt'/iVj//r>'C/r/Vf//^and  Eiiinnucl.  vjd." 

J.  P.  Collier,  Kegs.  0/ Stat.  Co.    See  N.  dr'  Q.,  -s^rd Scries,  i.  44. 

In  the  dedication,  he  at  length  acknowledges  the  authorship  ot 
Amyntas. 

IY  Aiiiyjitas  {owwA  fauour  in  your  gracious  eyes,  let  P/iiiiis  \>&Q 
accepted  for  Aniy?itas  sake.  I  haue  some  what  altered  6"  Tas- 
soes  Italian,  and  M.  H'atso/ts  Latine  Avtyutas,  to  make  them  both 
one  English.  But  Tassoes  is  Comicall,  therefore  this  verse  vnusual : 
yet  it  is  also  Pastoral,  and  in  efl'ect  nothing  els  but  a  continuation 
oi  a-glogues,  therefore  no  verse  fitter  than  this.   .  .   . 

1592.  Gabkii:l  Harvf.v,  writing  at  London;  the  third  oi h'x'r,  Foure Let- 
Sep.8-9.  ters  and  certaine  Sonnets,  printed  this  year  :  thus  enumerates  Wat- 
son among  a  number  of  writers,  all  evidently  then  living. 

I  cordially  recommend  to  the  deere  Loners  of  the  Mu>es  :  and  namely  to 
the  professed  Sonnes  of  the  same,  Edmond  Spencer,  Richard  Sta?i:httrst, 
Abraham  Fraunce,  Thomas  IVatson,  Samuel  Dii7tiell,  Tliojnas  hash,  and 
the  rest :  whonie  I  affectionately  thancke  for  their  studious  endeuours.  com- 
mendably  employed  in  enriching,  and  polishing  their  natiue  Tongue,  neuer 
so  furnished,  or  embelli.shed,  as  of  late.— /.  48. 
Mr.  Collier,  in  his  Bibl.  Cat.  ii.  490,  F.d.  1865. 

*'  Thomas  and  Watson  could  not  be  uncommon  names ;  but  in  the  register 
of  St.   Bartholomew  the  Less,  in  which  parish  various  literary  men  resided, 
we  meet  with  the  follo-ving  entry  of  a  burial,  the  date  of  which  accords  with 
the  period  when  it  is  likely  that  our  poet  expired  :  — 

'  26  Sept.  1592.   'I'homas  Watson,  gent,  was  buried.' 
It  has  never  been  anywhere  cited,  but  we  have  little  doubt  that  it  applies 
to  our  poet." 

Soon  after  this  is  the  following  entry  : 
1592*  IX.  "  x°  die  Novembris  [1592J.  Mr.  Ponsonby.     Entered  for  his  copie, 
A  booke  intituled  Aminte  gaiidia,  Authore  Thorn.  Watsono,  Lon- 
di[n]ensi  iuris  studioso.  .....  vj<*." 

J.  P.  Collier.    Regs,  of  Stat.  Co.    See  A^.  <&^  Q.,  ^rd  S.,  i.  322. 
The  title  of  this  work  is  as  follows  :     (4)  "  Aininta  Gajidia.    Au- 
thore Thoma  Watsono,  Londonincnsi,  iuris  Studioso.  Londini,  Impri- 
mis, Guilhelmi  Ponsonbei.  1592  :"  and  it  has  the  following  dedication: 
Illustris.sima:  Heroinae  omnibus  et  animi,  et  corporis  dotibus  ornatissimse, 
Mariae  Penbrokise  Comitissae. 

LAurigera  stirpe  prognata  Delia,  Sydnaei  vatis  Apollinei  genuuia  sorer  ; 
Alma  literarum  parens,  ad  cuius  immacuIatosaiii,.l';xus,  confugit  virtuh, 
barbariei  et  ignorantiae  impetu  violata,  vt  olim  a  Thrcicio  Tyranno  Philo- 
mela ;  Poetarum  nostri  temporis,  ingeniorumque  omnium  foelicissime  pullu- 
tantium,  Musa  ;  Dia  proles,  quceiam  rudi  ca'amo,  spiritus  infundis  elati 
fiiroris,  qiiibus  ipse  misellus,  plus  mihi  videor  prrr^tare  posse,  quam  criida 
n  )stra  indoles  proi'erre  solet :  Dignarc  Posthumo  huic  .Aiuyiua;,  vt  tuo  :i(1>>piiuo 


14  SOME  ACCOUNT  OF  THE 

filio  patrocinari :  Eoque  magis  quod  moribundus  pater,  illius  tutelam  humillimd 
tibi  legauerat.  Et  licet  illustre  nomen  tuum  non  solum  apud  nos,  sed  exteras 
etiam  nationes,  latius  propagatum  est,  quam  aut  vnquam  possit  aeruginosa 
Temporls  vetustate  aboleri,  aut  mortalium  encomijs  augeri,  (quomodo  enim 
quicquam  possit  esse  infinito  plus?)  multorum  tamen  camoenis,  quasi  siderum 
diademate  redimita  Ariadfie,  noli  hunc  purum  Phoebi  sacerdotem,  stellam 
alteram  coronse  tuae  largientem,  aspernari :  sed  animi  candore,  quem  sator 
hominum,  atque  deorum,  lupiter,  praenobili  familiae  tuae  quasi  haeriditarum 
alligauit,  accipe,  et  tuere.  Sic  nos,  quorum  opes  tenuissimae,  littorea  sunt 
Myrtus  Veneris,  Nymphaeque  Peneiae  semper  virens  coma,  prima  quaque 
poematis  pagina,  Te  Musarum  dommam,  in  auxilium  invocabimus  ;  tua 
denique  virtus,  q.uoe  virtutem  ipsam  ;  ipsam  quoque  aeternitatem  superabit. 
Honoris  tui  studiosissimus,  C.  M.  [? Christopher  Marlowe.] 
The  registration  and  dedication  oi  Aminta  Gaudia,  with  Harvey's  allusion, 
show  how  correct  Mr.  Collier's  opinion  is. 

1593.         George  Peele,  M.A.,  has  the  following  lines  \n  Ad M^zccetiatinn 
Prologtts,  in  his  work  entitled  Tlie  Honour  of  the  Garter. 
Why  thither  post  not  all  good  wits  from  hence. 
To  Chaucer,  Goivre,  and  to  the  fayrest  Fhaer 
That  ever  ventured  on  great  Virgils  works  ? 
To  IVatsoti,  worthy  many  Epitaphes 
For  his  sweet  Porsie,  for  Ainmtas  teares 
And  ioyes  so  well  set  downe. 
The  word  '  Epitaphes '  confirms  Watson's  death  anterior  to  the 
composition  of  this  Prologue. 
1593.  A  rare  Poetical  Miscellany.    "  The  Phoenix  Nest,  &c.    Set  forth 

by  R.  S.  of  the  Inner  Temple,  Gentleman.  Neiier  before  this  time 
published ;"  contains  three  following  poems  by  T.  W.  Gent.  :  that  is, 
'i'homas  Watson,  as  is  proved  by  the  first  of  them  appearing,  with 
variations,  in  Englands  Helicon,  1602,  with  his  name  in  full  after  it. 
Not  having  seen  the  Latin  text,  we  can  but  surmise  that  the  first 
is  a  translation  of  the  Eighth  day  of  Ajnyntas:  and  we  presume 
that  as  Watson  translated  Melibcetis  :  so  he  intended  to  have  turned 
y^  wjw/^j  into  English.  A  reference  to  Fraunce's  hexameters  will 
show  that  Watson  was  a  true  Poet :  and  Fraunce  a  scribbling  versifier. 
(0)  Aurora  now,  began  to  rise  againe. 

From  watrie  couch,  and  from  old  Tithons  side, 

In  hope  to  kisse  vpon  Acteian  plaine, 

Yong  Cephalus,  and  through  the  golden  glide, 

On  Easterne  coast,  she  cast  so  great  a  light. 

That  Phoebus  thought  it  time  to  make  retire, 

From  Thetis  Bowre,  wherein  he  spent  the  night, 

To  light  the  world  againe  with  heauenly  fire. 

Nor  sooner  gan  his  winged  steedes  to  chase 

The  Stigian  night,  mantled  in  dnskie  vale, 

But  poore  Amyntas,  hasteth  him  apace. 

In  desarts  thus,  to  weepe  a  wofull  tale. 

Now  silent  shades,  and  all  that  dwell  therein, 

As  Birds,  or  Beasts,  or  Wormes  that  creepe  on  grounde. 

Dispose  your  selues  to  teares,  while  I  begin, 

To  rew  the  griefe,  of  mine  eternall  wounde. 

And  dolefuU  ghosts,  whose  nature  flies  the  light, 

Come  seate  your  selues  with  me  on  eu'ry  side. 

And  whilst  1  die  for  want  of  my  delight, 

Lament  the  woes  that  Fancie  me  betide. 

Phillis  is  dead,  the  m.arke  of  my  desire, 

My  cause  of  loue,  and  shipwracke  of  my  ioycs, 

Phillis  is  gone,  that  set  my  hart  on  fire, 

'I'hat  clad  my  thonghis  with  ruinous  annoyes. 

Phillis  is  fled,  and  bides  I  wot  not  where, 

Phiilis  (alas)  the  praise  of  woman  kinde, 

Phillis,  the  Sun  of  this  our  hi'misphere, 

Whose  beames  made  me  and  many  others  blinde. 


WRITINGS  OF   THOMAS   \V  A  T  S  0  X.     15 

But  blinded  me  ^poore  man)  aboue  the  rest, 

That  like  olde  Oedipus,  I  Hue  in  thrall, 

Still  feele  the  worst,  and  neuer  hope  the  best, 

My  mirth  is  mone,  my  honie  drownd  in  gall. 

Hir  faire,  but  cniell  eies,  bewitcht  my  sight, 

Hir  sweele,  but  fading  speech,  enthrald  my  thought, 

And  in  hir  deeds  I  reaped  such  delight, 

As  brought  both  will,  and  libertie  to  nought. 

Therefore,  all  hope  of  happines  adue, 

Adue  desire  the  source  of  all  my  care, 

Dispaire  me  tels  my  weale  will  nere  rcnue, 

Till  this  my  soule,  doth  passe  in  Charons  Crare. 

Meane  time,  my  minde  must  suffer  Fortunes  .skorne, 

My  thoughts  stil  wound,  like  wounds  that  stil  are  green 

My  weakncd  lyms,  be  laide  on  beds  of  thorne, 

My  life  decaics,  although  my  death  foreseene. 

Mine  eies,  now  eies  no  more,  but  seas  of  tearcs, 

Weepe  on  your  fill,  to  coole  my  burning  brest. 

\Vhere  Loue  did  place  desire,  twi.xt  hope,  and  feares, 

(I  say)  desire,  the  author  of  vnrest. 

And  (would  to  gods)  Phillis  where  ere  thou  be. 

Thy  soule  did  see,  the  sowre  of  mine  estate, 

My  ioyes  ecllpst,  for  onely  want  of  thee. 

My  being  with  my  selfe  at  foule  debate. 

My  humble  vowes,  my  sufferance  of  woe 

My  sobs,  and  sighes,  and  euerwatching  eies, 

My  plaintife  teares,  my  wandring  to  and  froe, 

My  will  to  die,  my  neuer  ceasing  cries. 

No  doubt  but  then,  thy  sorrows  would  per.swade 

The  doome  of  death  to  cut  my  vitall  twist. 

That  I  with  thee,  amidst  the  infernall  shade. 

And  thou  with  me,  might  sport  vs  as  we  list. 

0  if  thou  waite  on  faire  Proserpines  traine 
And  hearest  Orpheus,  neere  th'  Elisian  springs 
Entreat  thy  Queeiie,  to  free  thee  thence  againe 

And  let  the  Thracian  guide  thee  with  his  strings.     7.  W.  Gent. 

(p)  Away,  dispaire,  the  death  of  hopeles  harts. 
For  hope  and  truth,  assure  me  long  agoe. 
That  pleasure  is  the  end  of  lingring  smarts, 
When  time,  with  iust  content,  rewardeth  woe. 
Sweet  vertues  throne  is  built  in  labours  towre. 
Where  Lawrell  wreath's  are  twist  for  them  alone. 
Whose  gals  are  burst  with  often  tasted  sowre, 
Whose  blis  from  bale  is  sprong,  whose  mirth  from  mone. 

1  therefore  striue  by  toyles,  to  raise  my  name, 
And  lason  like,  to  gaine  a  golden  fleece. 

The  end  of  eu'r^'  worke  doth  crowne  the  same. 

As  witnes  well,  the  happie  harmes  of  Greece  ; 
For  if  the  Greekes,  had  soone  got  Pryams  seat. 
The  glory  of  their  paines,  had  not  been  great.       T.  W.  Cent, 

(q)  I  hope  and  feare,  that  for  my  weale  or  woe 

That  heau'nly  lampe,  which  yeclds  both  heat  and  light, 
To  make  a  throne,  for  gods  on  earth  belowe, 

Is  cut  in  twaine,  and  fixt  in  my  delight. 
Which  two  faire  hemispheres,  through  light  and  heat, 
Planting  desire,  driuc  reason  from  hir  seate. 
No,  no,  my  too  forgetfull  toong  blaspheames, 

I  should  haue  saide,  that  where  these  hemispheres. 
In  harts,  though  eies,  fixe  hot  and  lightsome  beames, 

There  reason  works  desire,  and  hopes  breed  feares. 


i6 


SOME  A  C  C  0  UN  TOP   THE 


O  onely  obiect,  for  an  Eagles  eie, 

Whose  lighte  and  heat,  make  men  to  Hue  and  die. 

Twixt  these,  a  daintie  paradise  doth  lie, 

As  sweete  as  in  the  Sunne  the  Phenix  Bowre, 
As  white  as  snowe,  as  smooth  as  luorie. 

As  faire,  as  Psyches  bosome,  in  that  howre, 
When  she  disclosde  the  boxe  of  Beauties  Queene, 
All  this  and  more,  is  in  Sibilla  seene.  T.  W.  Gent. 

Reprinted  in  J.  P.  Collier's  Seven  English  Poet.  Misc.  1867,  //. 
122-126. 

1593*  X.  We  now  come  to  a  work  in  many  respects  of  superlative  interest. 
By  the  courteous  kindness  of  S.  Christie-Miller,  Esq.  of  Britwell, 
near  Maidenhead,  the  Reader  may  now  peruse  Watson's  principal 
English  posthumous  work,  reprinted  at  the  end  of  this  volume.  Its 
authorship  is  established  by  the  mitials  T.  W.  at  the  end  :  and  more 
positively  by  the  following  registration. 

"11  Aug.  [1593].  John  Danter.  Item  entred  for  his  copie,  &c., 
a  booke  intituled  The  teares  offansie,  or  loue  disdained.  By  T. 
Watson.  .......  vjd." 

J.  P.  Collier.    Regs,  of  Stat.  Co.    See  N.  &=  Q.,  2,rd  S.,  i.  402. 

This  work,  which  appears  to  have  received  but  little  attention  while 
passing  through  the  press,  is  here  reprinted  page  for  page.  The  loss 
of  the  eight  Sonnets  is  much  to  be  regretted. 

1594.  Richard  Barnfield's  allusion  to  Watson  in  his  Affectio7tate  Shep- 
heard  of  this  year,  we  have  already  quoted  at  j^.  4. 

1595.  (1)  In  a  work  entitled  Polimanteia,  &c.,  written  by  W.  C,  and 
published  at  Cambridge  {Gren.  Coll:  Brit.  M7csezan,^y]'\  there  is  at 
R.  3.  a  reference  in  the  side  notes  connecting,  in  a  literary  sense, 
Watson  with  Shakespeare,  (who  then  just  began  to  appear  in  print) 
in  a  way  that  may  best  appear  by  reproducing  the  passage  line  for 
line.  Let  o- 

ther  countries  (sweet  Cambridge)  enuie, 
(yet  admire)  my  l^ irgil,  thy  petrarch,  di- 
uine  Spe7iser.  And  vnlesse  I  erre,  (a  thing 
easie   in    such   simplicitie)    deluded    by 
dearlie  beloued  Delia,  and  fortunatelie 
fortunate  Cleopatra;  Oxford  thou  maist 
extoll     thy    courte-deare- verse    happie 
Daniell,  whose  sweete  refined  muse,  in 
contracted     shape,     were     sufficient    a- 
mongst    men,    to   gaine   pardon   of    the  Wanton 
sinne  to  Roseinorui,   pittie  to  distressed  \vatsoai 
Cleopatra,  and  euerliuing  praise  to  her  hejre. 
louing  Delia  : 
(2)  In  this  year  also  appeared  Spensers  Colin  Clonts  come  home 
again,  in  which  occur  the  following  lines  :  which  under  correction, 
we  take  to  refer  to  Watson. 

There  also  is  (ah  no,  he  is  not  now  !) 
But  since  I  said  he  is,  he  quite  is  gone, 
A7nyntas  quite  is  gone  and  lies  full  low, 
Hauing  his  Aiuajyllis  left  to  mone. 
Helpe,  O  ye  sliepheards,  help  ye  all  in  this, 
Helpe  Ainaryllis  this  her  losse  to  mourne  : 
Her  losse  is  yours,  your  losse  Aniyntas  is, 
Amyntas,  floure  of  shepheards  pride  forlorne. 
He  whilest  he  lined  was  the  n-.  blest  swaine, 
That  euer  piped  in  an  oaten  quill : 
Both  did  he  other,  which  could  pipe,  maintaine, 
And  eke  could  pipe  himselfe  with  passing  skill. 

1596.  Thomas  Nashe,    laggardly  replying  in  his  Hane  with  you  to 

Saffron-ivalden  to  Gabriel  Harvey,  has  the  following  allusions  to 
our  Poet,    'videntlv  then  dead,  at  the  end  'A  that  work. 


All  praise 

worthy. 

Lncreda 

Sweet,  Shak- 

?Iieare. 

Eluquent 

tiauescoD. 


WRITINGS  OF  THOMAS   WATSON.     17 

"  To  a  bend-roll  of  learned  men  and  Lords  hee  appeales,  -ivhethcr 
he  be  an  Asse  or  no,  in  the  forefront  of  whom,  he  puts  M.  Thotnas 
Watson,  the  Poet:  A  man  he  was  that  I  dearly  lou'd  and  honor'd,  and 
for  all  things  hath  left  few  his  eqiialls  in  England,  he  it  was  that  in 
the  company  of  diuers  Gentlemen  one  night  at  supper  at  the  Nags 
head  in  Cheape\  first  told  me  of  his  vanitie,  and  those  Hexameters 
made  of  him 

But  o  ivliat  fieives  of  that  good  Gabiiell  Haruey 
KnoTvne  to  the  ivorld  for  a  Joole  and  clapt  in  the  Fleet  for  a  Rimer." 
"  He  [Gabriel  Harvey]  raild  vppon  me  vnder  the  name  of  Piers 
Petitiilesse,  and  for  a  bribe  that  I  should  not  reply  on  him,  praisd 
me,  and  reckond  me  I'at  the  latter  end^  among  the  famous  Scholl^rs 
of  our  time,  as  S.  Philif>  Sidney,  M.  Watson,  M.  Spencer,  M. 
Daniell,  whom  he  hartily  tliankt,  and  promised  to  endow  with 
manic  complements  for  so  enriching  our  English  Tongue."  V  2. 
1598.  Francis  Meres,  in  Palladis  Tamia,  refers  four  times  to  Watson. 

'* So  also  these  Englishmen  being  Latine  Poets,  Gualter 

Haddon,  Nicholas  Car,  Gabriel  Haruey,  Christopher  Ocland, 
Thomas  Neivton  with  his  Leyland,  Thomas  IVatsoft,  Thomas 
Campion,  Bruns7verd  and  IVilley,  haue  attained  a  good  report  and 
honorable  aduancement  in  the  Latin  Empyre."— ^  280,  a. 

"As  Italy  had  Dante,  Boccnce,  Petrarch,  Tasso,  Celiano,  and  Arz- 
osto  :  so  England  had  Mathew  Roydon,  Thotnas  Atchelow,  Thotnas 
Watson,  Tfwtnas  Kid,  Robert  Greene  and  George  Peele."^f.  282,  b. 

"  These  are  our  best  for  I'ragedie Marlow,  Peele,  IVat- 

son.  Kid,  Shakespeare,  Drayton,  Chaptnan,  Decker,  and  Beniamin 
Johnson."^/.  283,  a. 

"As    Tluocritus  in   Greeke,    Virgil  and  Mantuan  in   Latine, 
Sanazar  in    Italian,   and   the   Authour  of  Amyntce  Gaudia  and 
Walsinghams  Melibaeus  are  the  best  for  pastorall."— :/!  284,  a. 
1600.  In  another  Poetical  Miscellany,  England's  Helicon,  there  are 

five  poems  by  Watson.     The  Amyntas  already  given  above.     The 
poems  reprinted  at  pp.  44,  128,  73:  and  the  following  new  one. 
(r)   The  Nimphes  meetitig  their  May  Queene,  entertaine 
her  with  this  Dittie. 
With  fragrant  flowers  we  strew  the  way. 
And  make  this  our  cheefe  holy-day. 
For  though  this  clime  were  blest  of  yore  ; 
Yet  was  it  neuer  proud  before. 

O  beauteous  Queene  of  second  Troy  : 
Accept  of  our  vnfayned  ioy. 
Now  th'  Ayre  is  sweeter  than  sweet  Balme, 
And  Satires  daunce  about  the  Palme, 
Now  earth  with  verdure  newly  dight, 
Giues  perfect  signes  of  her  delight. 

O  beauteous  Queene,  &c. 
Now  birds  record  new  harmonie. 
And  trees  doo  whistle  melodie. 
Now  euery  thing  that  Nature  breedes, 
Dooth  clad  it  selfe  in  pleasant  weedes. 

O  beauteous  Queene,  &c.        Tho.  Watson. 
See  Mr.  Collier's  Reprint,  /.  57  :  in  Seven  Eng.  Poet.  Misc.  1867. 

1602.  In  another  Poetical  collection,  Davison's  Poetical  Rapsodie  :  ten 

poems  of  the  'EKaTO/XTradia  are  quoted  ;  but  nothing  fresh. 
1606.  A  book  of  poetical  quotations,  known  as  Englands  Partiassas  has 

two  dozen  quotations  from  Watson,  all  from  the  'l^KaTO/XTradla. 
We  have  done.  Enough  has  been  adduced  to  show  how  high  Watson 
stood  in  the  estimation  of  his  contemporaries.  Upon  the  darkness  which 
has  since  covered  him  we  will  not  dwell.  May  it  prove  but  a  long  eclipse. 
May  he  be  justified  of  his  works.  May  he  in  future  be  better  known  :  and 
recognized  as  our  Scholler-Poet  of  Love,  our  English  Petrarch. 

B 


BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


THE'E/caT0/;t7ra^ia  OR  PASSIONATE  CenTURIE  OF  LoVE. 

(a)  Issues  in  tfje  auti}or's  lifetime. 
I.  As  a  separate  publication. 

1.  [1582].     London,     i  vol.  410.     See  title  on  /.  23.     A  partial  comparison 

of  the  text  of  the  British  Museum  copy  with  Mr.  Corser's 
copy,  reprinted  by  the  Spenser_  Society ;  shows  that  the 
original  edition  varies  in  some  tnimitice,  in  different  copies. 

(i))  Issues  since  tf)e  S[utf)or's  Uentfj. 
I.  As  a  separate  publication. 

2.  1869.  Manchester.     The  Spenser  Society.     Issue  No.  VI.     [A  Facsimile 
I  vol.  4to.  Reprint,  limited  to  two  hundred  copies.] 

II.    With  otJier  Works. 

3.  15  Mar.  1870.  London,     i  vol.  8vo.     English  Reprints:  see  title  at/,  i. 

Melibceus  sive  Ecloga  Inobitum,  &C. 

(a)  Issues  in  li}e  Slutijor's  lifetime. 
I.  As  a  separate pJiblication. 

1.  1590.   London.     1  vol.  410.     See  title  at/.  140. 

(b)  Issues  since  tl}e  Slutfjor's  tieatfj. 

II.   With  other  Works. 

2.  15  Mar.  1870.  London,     i  vol.  8vo.     English  Reprints :  see  title  at/,  i. 

An  Eclogue  vpon  the  Death,  &c. 

(a)  Issues  in  tf)e  'author's  lifetime. 
I.   As  a  separate  publication. 

1.  1590.  London,     i  vol.  4to.     See  title  at/.  141. 

(6)  Issues  since  tlje  ^utfjor's  tieatt. 
II.    With  other  Works. 

2.  15  Mar.  1870.  London,     i  vol.  8vo.     English  Reprints :  see  title  at/,  x. 

The  Teares  of  Fancy  or  Love  Disdained. 

(a)  Issues  in  ti^e  Siutljor's  lifctinte. 

None. 

(b)  Issues  since  tije  ^utfjor's  beatlj. 
I.    As  a  separate p7cblication. 

1.  1593.  Lond.  I  vol.  4to.    See  title  at/.  177.    The  only  copy  now  known  is 

in  the  collection  of  S.  Christie-Miller,  Esq.,  at  Britwell. 

II.    With  other  Works. 

2.  15  Mar.  1870.  London,     i  vol.  8vo.     English  Reprints',  see  title  at/.  1. 

.•.  It  will  be  seen,  that  three  out  of  the  above  four  works  are  now  re- 
printed for  the  first  time.  When,  at  Professor  Henry  Morlky's  suggestion, 
the  present  Reprint  was  determined  upon,  it  was  not  known  that  the  Spenser 
Society's  edition  of  the  first  of  them  was  in  contemplation.  That  edition  has 
appeared  in  the  interval,  and  there  is  but  one  regret  in  connection  with  it; 
that  the  issue  of  it  should  be  Umited  to  the  two  hundred  members  forming 
that  society  :  beyond  which  number  no  copy  can  be  obtained  for  love  or 
money.     When  will  the  day  of  limited  issues  come  to  an  end  ? 


INDEX  OF  FIRST  LINES,    ^c. 

IN   THE 

FOUR  WORKS  BY  THOMAS  WATSON,   HERE  REPRINTED. 


Z  A  TIN. 


Ad  risuni  faciles  soleo  cantare  Na/xras, 
Attamen  6  iusto  incerori parcite  Civli  ; 

CixUstes  inter  tumias,  quas  ordo  noiicnits 
Cunt  superis  Diuis  diuincis  incolit  arccs 

Dicite  7tunc  socij,  si  dicere  forte  potestis, 

Duttt  caelum,  dum  terra  tacet,  ventusque  silescit, 

Ergd,  si  quid  habes  Corydon  (qui^  te  quoque  vatem 

Foelices  alij  iuuenes,  quos  biatidula  Cypris 

Gracia  permultos  peperit  fcecunda  poetas. 

Hoc  si  non  sit  amor,  quod persentisco,  quid  ergo  est. 
Hue  ades  O  Nerei  nuttquatn  ttisi  vera  canentis 

Jamque graues  audi spirabilis  aura  querelas: 
lam  satis  est  lacryjnis  i?idultum  Tityre :  patdiiTn 
Jam  viduis  in  ngris  segetes  capita  inclinate, 
Jmprimis  aute/n  sacram  conennir  utcrque, 
yncipio  :  mecum  Diuce  liegete  Canioence,  . 

Jnf<Elix  misero  catiitur  dum  Jicrnia  versu, 
In  syluis,  exuta  suis  iam  qualibet  arbos 
Intered  Triton  stridcnti  mari)iora  concha 
Inuidet  (heu)  summis pastoribus  iviproba  Morta. 
Jtiuitutn  taciti  mceroris prodere  fontes 
JsthcEC  mitte  mihi:  me,  me  juagis  ista  decebunt. 

Libra  diem  tepido  non  aquet  sydere  nocti: 
Lucentis porrd  sinuosa  volumina  cceli, 
Lugeo  iam  querulus  vitte  tot  lustra peracta. 

Me  sibi  ter  binos  annos  vmimque  subegit 

Nunc  mihi  cessatum  satis  est :  tu  Tityre pauliim, 

O  Corydon,  Corydon,  noli perquirere  causas 
Omnia  7iunc  istitc  spaciosi  Numina  ruris 
O  vidui  ruris  vepres,  viburna,  rubeta  ; 

Qteales  Oebalij faustissijna  luminafratres, 

Quid  sit  amor,  qualisque,  cupis  me  scire  magistro  f 

Quis  presso  vacuam  telhireiJi  Jindet  aratro, 

Sa-pe  tneis  olim  placuit  tua  stridjcla  canna    . 
Sin  maiora  precor  quam  sit  mortalibus  eequuni, 
Soleniur  Dryadem,  nimio  quce  victa  dolore, 

Tnnta:ni  insidunt  anitnis  coelestibus  irce, 
Te  per  ego  trinas  Charlies,  hilaresque  NapiPas, 
Tityre,  iam  quoniam  prati  per  aniocna  vireta 
Tu  recti  Corydon  ad  nostras  rtira  querelas 
Tu  verb  Celebris  nymphae  Cretensis  alumne, 

"Ultima  mobiliutn  sphcerarmn,  sed  mihi  prima, 
Vade,  precor,  timidus  patrium  mittende  per  orbetn, 


142 
152 

168 
170 

154 
102 

158 

8i 


C.  DOWNHALL.       34 


42 
166 

160 
166 
162 
170 
152 
156 
162 
166 

150 
164 

158 
158 

126 
160 

ISO 
162 
164 

174 
135 
156 

156 
154 
170 

152 
150 
148 
164 
158 

z6o 

27 


20 


INDEX  OF  FIRST  LINES,    &-c. 


ENGLISH. 

About  the  well  which  from  mine  eies  did  flow, 

.4ct(Ton  lost  in  middle  of  his  sport 

Alas  deere  Tittis  mine,  my  auncient  frend, 

All  yee,  tlaat  greeue  to  thinke  my  death  so  neere, 

AH  yee  that  loue  compare  your  palnes  with  mine, 

Although  the  droppes,  which  chaung'd  Actceons  shape 

Amongst  the  Idle  toyes  that  tosse  my  brayne, 

And  was  not  Astrophill  in  flowring  prime. 

Are  wheeling  orbs  so  full  of  foule  despight, 

At  last,  though  late,  farewell  olde  wellada  ; 

A  world  of  woes  doth  raigne  within  my  brest, 

Aye  me  that  loue  wants  power  to  pierce  the  hart, 

Blame  me  not  deere  loue  though  I  talke  at  randon. 
Behold  deare  Mistres  how  each  pleasant  greene, 
But  Tityriis  inough,  leaue  of  a  while  : 
By  syluane  nymphs,  and  louely  Graces  three, 

Castor  and  Polhix,  Loedaes  louelie  twins, 

Come  gentle  Death  ;  who  cals?  one  thats  opprest : 

Cupid,  where  is  thy  golden  quiuer  nowe  ? 

Diana  and  her  nimphs  in  siluane  brooke, 
Diana,  since  Hippolytus  is  deade, 

Each  Creature  ioyes  Appollos  happie  sight,     . 
Each  thought  I  thinke  is  frend  to  her  I  Loue  ;  _ 
Each  tree  did  boast  the  wished  spring  times  pride, 
Esclepiad  did  cure  with  trumpets  sounde 

Fast  flowing  teares  from  watery  eies  abounding, 
Fortune  forwearied  with  my  bitter  mone, 

Goe  Idle  lines  vnpolisht  rude  and  base, 

Hand,  hart  and  eie,  tucht  thought  and  did  behold, 
Harke  wanton  youthes,  whome  Beawtie  maketh  blin 
Harke  you  that  list  to  heare  what  sainte  I  serue  : 
Heere  end  my  sorrow,  no  here  my  sorrow  springeth, 
Hopeles  and  helpeles  too,  poore  loue  amated, 

I  curse  the  time,  wherein  these  lips  of  mine 

I  ioy  not  peace,  where  yet  no  warre  is  found  ; 

I  long  maintayned  warre  gainst  Reasons  rule, 

I  meruaile  I,  why  poets  heretofore, 

I  now  beginne  :  Apollo  guide  my  sounde, 

I  Rue  to  thinke  vpon  the  dismall  day 

I  saw  the  obiect  of  my  pining  thought,      _   _     . 

I  wrote  vppon  there  sides  to  eke  their  plaining, 

If  Cupid  were  a  childe,  as  Poets  faine. 

If  grauer  headdes  shall  count  it  ouerlight, 

\{  loue  himselfe  be  subiect  vnto  Lotte 

\{ Loue  had  lost  his  shaftes,  and  loue  downe  threw 

If  Tityus  wretched  wight  beheld  my  paines,    . 

If 't  bee  not  loue  I  feele,  what  is  it  then  ? 

Imperious  loue  who  in  the  prime  of  youth, 

In  all  this  world  I  thinke  none  lou's  but  I.  _ 

In  Clowdes  she  shines  and  so  obscurely  shineth. 

In  prime  of  youthly  yeares  as  then  not  wounded, 

In  secrete  seate  and  centre  of  my  hearte, 

In  that  I  thirst  for  such  a  Goddesse  grace 

In  Thetis  lappe,  while  Titan  tooke  his  rest,    . 

In  time  long  past,  when  in  Dianaes  chase 

In  time  the  Bull  is  brought  to  weare  the  yoake; 


Peele. 


193 

44 
107 

93 

82 
no 
196 
155 
153 
118 

88 
190 

205 
202 
167 
i5t 

ns 

92 

106 

203 
120 

204 
72 

204 
49 

192 

189 

178 

203 

134 

43 

198 

i8i 

130 
76 

124 
48 

153 

109 

189 

194 

55 

36 

73 

97 

87 

41 

199 

61 

205 

179 

104 

98 

68 

56 

83 


INDEX   OF  FIRST  LINES,    &-c. 


21 


It  plensd  my  Mistris  once  to  take  the  aire, 
It's  seldoine  seeiie  that  Merite  hath  his  due,    . 

Like  as  the  siUie  5/rr/amids  the  night, 
Long  haue  I  sued  to  fortune  death  and  lone,  . 
Long  haue  1  swome  against  the  wished  wane. 
Long  time  I  fought,  and  fiercely  waged  warre, 
Loue  hath  dehght  in  sweete  delicious  fare  ; 
Loue  hath  two  shaftes,  the  one  of  beaten  gold, 
Loue  is  a  sowr  delight;  a  sugred  greefe ; 

Many  haue  liu'd  in  countreys  farre  and  ny, 
Rlyne  eyes  dye  first,  which  la'-t  enioyed  life,    . 
My  gentle  birde,  which  sung  so  sweete  of  late, 
My  hart  accus'd  mine  eies  and  was  offended, 
My  hart  impos'd  this  penance  on  mine  eies,     . 
My  harte  is  sett  him  downe  twixt  hope  and  feares 
My  heedelesse  hart  which  Loue  yet  neuer  knew. 
My  humble  sute  hath  set  my  minde  on  pride. 
My  ioyes  are  donne,  my  comfort  quite  dismay'd, 
My  little  booke  goe  hye  thee  hence  away. 
My  loue  more  bright  than  Cinthias  horned  head. 
My  loue  is  past,  woe  woorth  the  day  and  liow'r. 
My  Mistres  seeing  her  faire  counterfet 
My  waterie  eies  let  fall  no  trickling  teares, 

Not  she,  whom  Io7te  transported  into  Crete ;    . 
Now  Aire,  and  what  thy  circuites  doe  containe, 
Now  Corydon  (for  eurie  shepheard  swaine 
Now  Loue  triumphed  hauing  got  the  day. 
Now  Meliboeus  in  comparelesse  place, 
Nowe  Musicke  hide  thy  face  or  blush  for  shame, 
Nowe  tell  me  shephards  all,  and  fellow  swaynes, 
Nowe  Tityrus,  since  wee  at  ease  are  lade, 

O  all  that  all  the  Vniuers  containes 

Oceamis  not  long  agoe  decreed 

O  Corydon  forbeare  by  deepe  inquire 

Oft  haue  I  raild  against  loue  many  waies, 

O  goulden  bird  and  Phenix  of  our  age, 

O  happy  men  that  finde  no  lacke  in  Loue ; 

O  let  me  interrupt  thee  yet  once  more, 

O  thou  that  rulest  in  Ramnis  golden  gate, 

O  Tityrjts  thy  plaint  is  ouerlong. 

Our  Meliboeus  lius  where  Seraphins 

O  what  a  life  is  it  that  Louers  ioy, 

O  would  my  loue  although  too  late  lament  mee, 

Phebus  delightes  to  view  his  Lawrel  Tj-ee ;     . 

Resolu'd  to  dust  intomb'd  heere  lieth  Loue,     . 

Shee  smild  to  see  her  sonne  in  such  a  rage. 
So  great  a  Light  hath  set  my  mind  on  fire. 
Some  aske  me,  when,  and  howe  my  loue  begunne; 
Some  say  that  women  loue  for  to  be  praised,    . 
Some  that  reporte  great  Alexafiders  life, 
Speake  gentle  heart,  where  is  thy  dwelling  place  ? 
Still  let  me  liue  forlorne  and  die  disdained, 
Sweete  liberty  restores  my  woonted  ioy, 
Sweete  Venus  if  as  nowe  thou  stand  my  friende. 
Such  is  the  Saint,  whom  I  en  earth  adore. 

Taking  a  truce  with  teares  sweete  pleasures  foe, 

That  Second  Simne,  whose  beames  haue  dimd  my  sight, 


M.  ROYDON. 


191 

35 

84 
200 
200 
179 
125 
99 
54 

64 
46 

52 

188 

188 

38 

91 

100 

105 
36 
206 
129 
201 
196 

III 
161 

151 
182 
169 
51 
155 
149 

157 
108 

151 

208 

47 
77 

165 
199 
161 
169 
182 
197 

128 

137 

180 
85 
74 

193 
50 
39 

190 

122 
40 
6S 

193 
80 


22 


INDEX  OF  FIRST  LINES,    &-c. 


BUCKE 


ACHELEY. 


That  thing,  wherein  mine  eyes  haue  most  dehght. 

The  banke  whereon  I  leand  my  restles  head, 

The  common  ioye,  the  cheere  of  companie,     . 

The  Harpye  birdes,  that  did  in  such  despight 

The  haughtie  Mgle  Birde,  of  Birdes  the  best, 

The  hunted  Hare  sometime  doth  leaue  the  Hound, 

The  Marigold  so  Hkes  the  louely  Sunne, 

The  Muses  not  long  since  intrapping  Lone 

The  priuate  place  which  I  did  choose  to  waile. 

The  Salamander  liues  in  fire  and  flame, 

The  souldiar  worne  with  warres,  delightes  in  peace; 

The  Starr's,  which  did  at  Petrarch's  byrthday  raigne, 

The  tender  buds  whom  cold  hath  long  kept  in. 

Then  from  her  fled  my  hart  in  sorrow  wrapped. 

Then  on  the  sodaine  fast  away  he  fled, 

Then  thus  (though  loath)  as  griefe  will  suffer  me, 

There  is  a  monstrous  hill  in  Sicill  soyle, 

This  latter  night  amidst  my  troubled  rest 

Those  whose  kind  harts  sweet  plttie  did  attaint, 

Thou  foolish  God  the  Author  of  my  griefe. 

Though  somewhat  late,  at  last  I  found  the  way 

Thou  glasse,  wherein  my  Dajne  hath  such  delight, 

Tliou  Glasse,  wherein  that  Sutme  delightes  to  see 

Tho  taking  in  her  lap  the  God  of  loue, 

Tho  with  a  showre  of  teares  I  entertained. 

Thy  booke  beginning  sweete  and  ending  sowre,  .      T. 

Thy  tunes  haue  often  pleas'd  mine  eare  of  yoare, 

Time  wasteth  yeeres,  and  month's,  and  howr's  : 

Vnhappy  is  the  wight,  thats  voide  ^i  Loue, 

Was  euer  man,  whose  Lotie  was  like  to  mine? 

Well  fare  the  life  sometimes  I  ledde  ere  this,  . 

Were  words  dissolued  to  sighs,  sighs  into  teares, 

What  ayles  poor  Vemis  nowe  to  sit  alone. 

What  happie  howre  was  that  I  lately  past     _  . 

What  scowling  cloudes  haue  overcast  the  skie, 

What  though  Leander  swamme  in  darksome  night 

When  as  I  marke  the  ioy  of  euery  wight. 

When  Cupid  is  content  to  keepe  the  skies. 

When  first  mine  eyes  were  blinded  with  Desire, 

When  first  these  eyes  beheld  with  great  delight 

When  Maye  is  in  his  prime,  and  youthfull  spring 

When  neither  sighs  nor  sorrowes  were  of  force 

When  Pria7ns  sonne  in  midst  oi  Ida  plaine 

When  werte  thou  borne  sweet  Lo7ie  ?  who  was  thy  sire  ? 

Where  heate  of  loue  doth  once  possesse  the  heart. 

Where  may  I  now  my  carefull  corps  conuay, 

Wherr.  tender  Loue  had  laide  him  downe  to  sleepe, 

While  otbers  feede,  my  fancy  makes  me  fast ; 

Who  can  recount  the  vertues  of  my  deare. 

Who  knoweth  not,  how  often  Venus  sonne  _    . 

Who  list  to  vewe  dame  Natures  cunning  skil. 

Who  taught  thee  first  to  sigh  Alasse  sweet  heart  ? 

Why  Hue  I  wretch  and  see  my  ioyes  decay,     . 

Ye  captiue  soules  of  blindefold  Cyprians  boate 

Yee  seau7ifold flames ,  whose  euer-circling  fires 

Ye  stately  Dames,  whose  beauties  farre  excell, 

Yet  glorious  heauns,  6  pardon  my  blaspheme, 

Yf  Poets  haue  done  well  in  times  long  past, 

You  sacred  Nymphes,  Apolloes  sisters  faire,    .  C.  Downhai.l. 

Youth  made  a  fault  through  lightnes  of  Beleefe, 


95 
192 
198 
133 
136 
207 

45 
119 
191 

79 
121 

33 
202 
187 
181 
151 
94 
78 
194 
112 

131 
60 

59 
180 
187 

33 
157 
"3 

(>Z 
96 

37 

206 

132 

90 

114 

66 

207 

103 

71 

75 

62 

201 

69 

58 

"5 

197 

89 

86 

67 

lOI 

57 
208 

195 

127 

159 
7C 

153 
53 
34 

123 


i 


mi 


To  the   Right   Honorable  my 

very  good  Lord  Edward  de  Vere,  Earle 

of  Oxenford,    Vicount    Bulbecke,    Lord 

of  Efcales^  aud  Badlef7}iere,  and  Lord  High 

Chamberlaine  of  E?igland^  all 

happineffe. 

I.exander  the  Great ^  pafsmg  on  a  time  by  the 
workejliop  of  Apelles,  curiouslie  furueyed 
fome  of  his  doinges :  whofe  long  flay  in 
viewing  thefn,  brought  all  the  people  into 
fo  great  a  good  liking  of  the  painters  worke- 
manfJiip,  that  immediatelie  after,  they  bought  vp  all  his 
piHureSj  what  price  foeuer  he  fet  them  at. 

And  the  like  good  happe,  (Right  Honorable,)  befelvnto 
mee  latelie,  concerning  thefe  my  Loue  Pafsions,  which  then 
chaunced  to  Apelles,  ^^a*  his  Fortraites.  For  fence  tJie 
world  hath  vnderfiood,  (I  know  not  how)  that  your 
Honor  had  willinglie  voutchfafed  the  acceptance  of  this 
worke,  and  at  C07iuenient  leifures  fauourablie  perufed  it, 
being  as  yet  but  in  written  hand,  many  haue  oftentimes 
and  earneflly  called  vpon  mee,   to  put  it  to  the  preffe, 


26  The  Epiftle  Dedicatorie 

that  for  their  mony  they  might  but  fee,  what  your  Lord- 
fhip  with  fome  liking  had  alreadie  perufed.  And  there- 
wit  hall  fome  of  them  faid  (either  to  yeeld  your  Honour 
his  due  pray fe,  for  foundnes  of  iudgemcnt ;  or  to  pleafe 
me,  of  whome  long  fmce  they  had  cojzceiued  well)  that 
Alexander  would  like  of  fw  lines,  but  fuch  as  were 
drawen  by  the  cunning  hand,  aitd  with  the  curious  penftll 
of  Apelles.  Which  I  fet  not  doivne  here  to  that  end, 
that  I  would  conferi'e  my  Poemes  with  Apelles  Portraites 
for  worthineffe ;  albeit  Ifitlie  compare  your  Honors  perfon 
with  Alexanders,  for  excellcncie.  But  how  bold  foeuer  I 
haue  bene,  in  turjting  out  this  my  pettie poore  focke  vpo?i 
the  open  Co?nmon  of  the  ivide  world,  where  euerie  man 
may  behold  their  nakedneffe,  1  humbly  make  request,  that 
if  any  florme  fall  vnlooked  for  (by  the  fault  of  malicious 
high  foreheads,  or  the  poyfo7i  of  euill  edged  tongues)  thefe 
my  little  ones  mayeflirowde  them  felues  vnder  the  broad 
leafed  Platan  e  of  your  Honoiirs  patronage.  And  thus  at 
this  prefent,  I  humbly  take  7?ty  leaue ;  but  first  wifJiing 
the  contijiuall  encreafe  of  your  LordfJiips  honour,  with 
abundaiice  of  true  Friends,  reconciliation  of  all  Foes,  and 
what  good  foeuer  tendeth  vnto  perfcH:  happines. 

Your  Lordfliips  humbly  at  comniaund 
Thomas  VVatfon. 


To  the  freiidly  Reader. 

Ourteous  Reader,  if  anie  thing  herein  either 
pleafe  or  profitte  thee,  afforde  me  thy 
good  worde  in  recompence  of  my  paines : 
if  ought  offend  or  hurt  thee,  I  defire  that 
thou  forget  the  one,  and  forgiue  the  other. 
This  toye  being  hked,  the  next  may  prooue 
better ;  being  difcouraged,  wil  cut  of  the 
HkeHehood  of  my  trauaile  to  come.  But 
by  that  meanes  all  will  be  well,  and  both  parties  pleafed. 
For  neither  fliall  I  repent  my  labour  in  the  like,  nor 
thou  be  anie  more  troubled  with  my  faultes  or  follies. 
Yet  for  this  once  I  hope  that  thou  wilt  in  refped;  of 
my  trauaile  in  penning  thefe  louepafsions,  or  for  pitie 
of  my  paines  in  fuffering  them  (although  but  fuppofed) 
fo  furuey  the  faultes  herein  efcaped,  as  eyther  to  winke 
at  them,  as  ouerfightes  of  a  blinde  Louer;  or  toexcufe 
them,  as  idle  toyes  proceedinge  from  a  youngling 
frenzie  ;  or  lafllie,  to  defend  them,  by  faying,  it  is 
nothing  Prceter  decorum  for  a  maiemed  man  to  halt  in 
his  pafe,  where  his  wound  enforceth  him,  or  for  a  Poete 
to  falter  in  his  Poeme,  when  his  matter  requireth  it. 
Homer  in  mentioning  the  fwiftnes  of  the  w^inde,  maketh 
his  verfe  to  runne  in  poflhafle  all  vpon  Da^ihis :  and 
Virgin  m  exprefsing  the  flriking  downe  of  an  oxe,  letteth 
the  end  of  his  hexameter  fall  \Y\\h?i\\,Procumbit  htimi  bos. 
Therefore  if  I  roughhewed  my  verfe,  where  my  fenfe 
was  vnfetled,  whether  through  the  nature  of  the  pafsion, 
which  I  felt,  or  by  rule  of  art,  which  I  had  learned, 
it  may  feeme  a  happie  fault ;  or  if  it  were  fo  framed 
by  counfell,  thou  mayefl  t'-^inke  it  well  donne  :  if  by 
chaunce,  happelie. 


28  TO    THE    READER. 

Yet  write  I  not  this  to  excufe  my  felfe  of  fuch  errours, 
as  are  efcaped  eyther  by  dotage,  or  ignorance :  but 
thofe  I  referre  to  thy  gentle  curtifie  and  fauourable 
con{lru6lion,  or  lay  manie  of  them  vpon  the  Printers 
necke,  whom  I  would  blame  by  his  owne  preffe,  if  he 
would  fuffer  me. 

As  for  any  Ariflarchus,  Momus,  or  Zoilus,  if  they 
pinch  me  more  then  is  reafonable,  thou  courteous 
Reader,  which  arte  of  a  better  difpofition,  fhalt  rebuke 
them  in  my  behalfe  ;  faying  to  the  firfl,  that  my  birdes 
are  al  of  mine  own  hatching,  and  that  my  onelie  ouer- 
much  hafl  made  Sol  angrie  in  theire  Birthday  -,  to  the 
fecond,  that  although  Venus  be  in  my  verfe,  yet  her 
flipper  is  left  out ;  to  the  lafl  and  worfl,  that  I  rather 
take  vpon  me  to  write  better  then  Chcerilus,  than  once 
fuppofe  to  imitate  Homer. 

I  am  ouer  long,  as  well  for  the  feare  I  had  to  be 
bitten  by  fuch  as  are  captious,  as  for  the  defire  I  haue 
to  pleafe  thee  that  art  frendlie.  But  fmce  I  now  wel 
remember  me,  that  nothing  is  more  eaflie  let  flowne, 
nothing  foner  difperfed,  nothing  later  recalled  backe 
againe,  then  the  bitter  blafl  of  an  euill  fpoaken  man, 
and  that  he,  whome  it  fhall  hurt,  had  no  recure  but  by 
patience ;  I  will  fet  it  behinde  my  heele,  as  a  hurt 
remedileffe,  or  els,  when  it  comes,  falue  it  vp  with 
patience. 

In  the  meane  fpace  (curteous  Reader)  I  once  againe 
craue  the  fauourable  iudgement :  and  fo,  for  breuitie 
fake,  abruptlie  make  an  end  j  committing  the  to  God, 
and  my  worke  to  thy  fauour. 

Thine,  as  thou  art  his. 
Thomas  Watfon. 


John  Lyly  to  the  Authour  his  friend. 

Ygood friend,  Ihaue  read  yotirneu>pafsions, 
and  they  haue  renewed  mine  old pleafures, 
the  which  brought  to  me  no  lejjfe  delight, 
then  they  haue  done  toyourfelfe  co?nmefida- 
tions.  And  certes  had  not  one  of  mine  eies 
about  ferioiis  affaires  beene  watchfully  both 
by  being  too  too  bufie  had  beene  wajiton :  fuch 
is  the  nature  of  persuading  plcafure,  that  it  melteth  the 
marrowe  before  it  fcorch  thejkifi,  and  bur7ieth  before  it 
war?fieth:  Not  vnlike  vnto  the  oyle  of  leat,  which  rotteth 
the  bo  fie  and  neuer  ranckleth  the  flefli,  or  the  Scarab  flies ^ 
which  enter  into  the  roote  ajid  fieuer  touch  the  rinde. 

A?id  whereas  you  defire  to  haue  my  opinio  ft,  you  ffiay 
ifnagine  that  ffiy  flofnake  is  rather  cloyed^  thefi  quefie,  and 
therfore  ffiifie  appetite  of  leffe  force  then  mine  affection, 
fearing  rather  a  furfet  offweeteftes,  then  defiring  afatif 
fying.  The  repeatifig  of  Loue,  wrought  in  me  a  remem- 
brance of  likifig,  but  ferching  the  very  vaines  of  my  hearte, 
J  could  fifide  nothing  but  a  broad  fcarre,  where  I  left  a 
deepewounde:  and  loofeflrifiges,  where  I  tyed  hard  knots  : 
and  a  table  offleele,  where  1  fraffied  a  plot  of  wax. 

Whereby  I  noted  that  young  fwafines  are  grey,  afidthe 
olde  white,  you  fig  trees  tefider,  a  fid  the  old  tough,  you  fig 
men  afnorous,  and  growifig  in  yeeres,  either  wifer  or 
warier.  The  Cor  all  in  the  water  is  a  foft  weede,  on  the 
land  a  hard flone :  afwordefrieth  in  thefirelikeablacke  ele^ 
but  layd  in  earth  like  white  fnowe :  the  heart  in  loue  is  al- 
together pa  fsiofiate,  but  free  from  defire,  altogether  carelefse. 


30 

But  it  is  not  my  intent  to  inueigh  againji  loue,  which 
women  account  but  a  bare  word,  and  that  men  reuerence 
as  the  bejl  God :  onely  this  I  would  add  without  offence 
to  Gentlewomen,  that  were  not  men  more  fuperjlicious  in 
their  praifeSy  then  women  are  conjlant  in  their  pafsions : 
Loue  would  either  Jhortly  be  worne  out  ofvfe,  or  men  out 
of  loue ,  or  women  out  of  lightnes.  I  can  condemne  7ione 
but  by  conieflure,  nor  commend  any  but  by  lying,  yet 
fufpicion  is  as  free  as  thought,  and  as  far  re  as  I  fee  as 
7iecefjary,  as  credulitie. 

Touching  your  Miflres  I  mufl  needes  thinke  well,  feeing 
you  haue  written  fo  7vell,  but  as  falfe  glaffes  fhewe  the 
fairefl  faces,  fo  fine  glofes  amend  the  baddefl  fancies. 
Apelles  painted  the  Phenix  by  hear ef ay  not  by  fight,  and 
Lyfippus  engraued  Vulcan  with  a  fir  eight  legge,  whome 
nature  framed  with  a  poult  foote,  which  proueth  men  to 
be  of  greater  affeHion  their  iudgement.  But  in  that  fo 
aptly  you  haue  varied  vppon  women,  I  will  not  vary 
from  you,  fo  cojifeffe  I  mufl,  and  if  I  fhould  not,  yet 
mought  I  be  compelled,  that  to  Loue  were  thefweetefl  thing 
in  the  earth :  Lf  women  were  the  faithfullefl,  and  that 
women  would  be  more  confiaJtt  if  men  were  more  wife. 

And  feeing  you  haue  vfed  7nee  fo  friendly,  as  to  make 
me  acquainted  with  your  pafsions,  I  will  fliortly  make 
you  pryuie  to  mine,  which  I  woiilde  be  loth  the  printer 
fhoulde  fee,  for  that  my  fancies  being  neuer  fo  crooked  he 
would  put  them  in  flreight  lines,  vnfit  for  my  humor, 
neceffariefor  his  art,  who  fetteth  downe,  blifide,  in  as 
many  letters  as  feeing. 

Farewell. 


Authoris  ad   Libellum 
ftmin  Protrepticon. 

^"^  I- ;.'J^  Ade,precor^  ti7nid2ispatnum  mittendeperorbeniy 
Nee  nugas  iaBa  parue  libelle  tuas. 
Si  quis  Arijlarehus  mordaci  Iceferit  ore, 

Culpariim  caufas  ingeniofus  habe. 
Si  rogat,  vnd^  venis,  die  tic  depaupere  Vena^ 
Non  ambire  tuas  laurea  ferta  comas. 
Sique  rogat,  verbis  quis  adauxit  77ietra  foiuiis, 

Ex  animo  nofneft  die  eeeidiffe  tibi. 
Forfitan  intrabis  nojlrce  faeraria  Diuce, 

Quam  eolit  in  medijs  multa  Diana  rofis, 
Quce  Cybele  eoeli  nojlri ;  quce  gloria  regni 

V?iiea:  quceque  fui  fola  Sybilla  foli  ; 
Quce.  vatum  liina  ejl ;  quce  doflis  doBior  ipfa; 

luno  opibuSj  Pallas  moribus,  ore  Venus  ; 
Quce  fuperat  Reges,  quantum  quereeta  myricas  ; 

Qjuam  recinat  Famce  buccina  nulla  fat  is. 
Ilia  tuos  fanflo  fi  fpeflet  lumine  rithmos, 

O  quantum  gemino  Sole  beatus  eris  ? 
Tu  fed Jlratus  humi,  fupplex  ample flere  plantas, 


32 

Cuius  erit  vili  ponder e  Icefa  manus, 
Mctamen^  hie  mofteo,  nefperes  tantafutura; 

Attica  non  auris  murmura  vana  probat. 
Hie  quoque  feu  fuheas  Sydnceijfnie  Dyeri 

Scrinia,  qua  Mufis  area  bitta  patet; 
Die  te  Xeniolum  non  diuitis  ejfe  elientis, 

ConfeBum  Dryadis  arte,  rudique  manu; 
Et  tamen  exhihitum  Vero,  qui  inagna  meretur 

Virtute  et  vera  nobilitate  fua. 
Inde  ferenato  vultu  te  mitis  vterque 

Perleget,  et  noeuos  condet  vterque  tuos. 
Dum  famulus  Verum  eomitaris  in  aurea  te^a, 

OfficiJ  femperfit  tibi  eura  tui. 
Turn  fortaffe  pijs  Nyinphis  dabit  ilk  legenduniy 

Cum  de  Cyprigeno  verba  iocofa  ferent. 
Si  qua  tui  nimium  Domini  miferetur  amantis, 

Sie  erepitafolijs,  vt  gefnuiffe  putet. 
Tetricafi  qua  tamen  blandos  damnauerit  ignes. 

Die  tu,  mentito  me  tepuiffefoco ; 
Tumque  refer  talos,  etfixum  ealee  figillum, 

Qud  Venerem  temnis,  fliolumque  fuum. 
Taliter  efficies,  vi  amet  te  Candida  turba, 

Forfan  et  Autoris  palma  futura  tui. 
Viue  libelle,  precor,  Domino  foelicior  ipfo, 

Quern  fine  demerito  fors  ifiopina  premit : 
Denique,  (fi  vifumfuerit)  die  montis  in  alto 

Pierij  vacuum  tempora  dura  pati. 


A    Ouatorzain,    in    the  com- 

vicndation    of   ]\1  after    Thomas 

VVatfon,  and  of  his  Mi/Ires,  for  2vho7n 

he  wrote  this  Booke  of  Pafsionat 

Soiuictes. 

He  flair's,  which  did  at  PdrarcJCs  byrthday  raigne, 

y^  Were  fixt  againe  at  ihy  natiuity, 
Deflening  thee  the  Thufcaiis  poefie, 

Who  fkald  the  flcies  in  lofty  Quatorzain, 

The  Mufes  gaue  to  thee  thy  fatall  vaine, 

The  very  fame,  that  Petrarch  had,  whereby 
Mado?ma  Laures  fame  is  growne  fo  hy, 

And  that  whereby  his  glory  he  did  gaine. 

Thou  hafl  a  Lanre,  whom  well  thou  dofl  commend, 
And  to  her  praife  thy  pafsion  fongs  do  tend ; 

Yee  both  fuch  praife  deferue,  as  nauglit  can  fmother ; 
In  briefe  with  Petrarch  and  his  Laiire  in  grace 
Thou  and  thy  Dame  be  equall,  faue  percafe 

Thou  paffe  the  one,  and  fhe  excell's  the  other. 

G.  Biicke, 

fTo  the  A  lit  hour. 
Hy  booke  beginning  fweete  and  ending  fowre, 
)  XA  Deere  friend,  be\vrayes  thy  falfe  fucceffe  in  loue, 

Where  fmiling  firfl,  thy  Miflres  falles  to  lowre. 
When  thou  did'fl  hope  her  curtefie  to  proue ; 
And  finding  thy  expected  lucke  to  fayle. 
Thou  falfl  from  praife,  and  dofl  begin  to  rayle. 
To  vfe  great  tearmes  in  praife  of  thy  deuife, 
I  thinke  were  vaine  :  therefore  I  leaue  them  out ; 
Content  thee,  that  the  Cenfure  of  the  wife 
Hath  put  that  needeles  queflion  out  of  doubt : 

Yet  ho  we  I  weigh  the  worke  that  thou  hafl  wrought, 
My  iudgement  I  referre  vnto  thy  thought. 

T.  Acheley. 


An  Ode,  written  to  the  Mufes  Concerning 
this  Authour. 

^Ou  facred  Nymphes^  Apolloes  fiders  faire, 
Daughters  of  loiie^  parentes  of  rare  deuife, 
Why  take  you  no  deUght  in  change  of  ayre  ? 
Is  Helicon  your  onely  paradife  ? 

Hath  Britan  foyle  no  hill,  nt)  heath,  no  well, 
.    No  wood,  no  wit,  wherein  you  lifl  to  dwell  ? 
Ladies  voutfafe  with  pacience  once  to  viewe 
Our  liuely  fprings,  high  hills,  and  pleafaunte  fhades. 
And  as  you  like  the  feat  and  countries  hewe, 
Pitche  downe  your  tentes,  and  vfe  your  fporting  trades : 
Hard  hap  it  is,  if  nothing  here  you  finde 
That  you  can  deeme  delightfull  to  your  minde, 
Loe  Watfon  prell  to  enterteine  your  powre 
In  pleafante  fprings  of  flowing  wit,  and  fkill : 
If  you  efleeme  the  pleafures  of  his  bower. 
Let  Britan  beare  your  fpring,  your  groue  and  hill. 
That  it  hence  foorth  may  of  your  fauour  boafl, 
And  him,  whome  firfl  you  heere  voutfafe  for  hoall. 
C.  Downhalus. 

^^^^  Eiufdem  aliud  de  Authore. 

^^^[jRcecia  permidtos  peperit  foecunda  poetas. 


V^\,         Quorum  lap/a  diu  fcecula,  fama  i7ianet, 
Aiifonia  ArgoliccB  tellus  poji  cemula  laudis 

Tranjlulit  in  Latios  do^iim  Helicona  finus* 
Acceptain  Latiiim  tetiuit  fouitque  poejln, 

Jnque  dies  Lauriis  anget,  Apollo,  tuas. 
Gallica  Parnafso  ccepit  ditefcere  lingua, 

Ronfardique  operis  Ltixuriare  nouis. 


\ 


35 
Sola  quia  ijiterea  nullum  paris  Atiglia  vatem  ? 

VerJIfices  multi,  nemo  poda  iibi  ejl. 
Scilicet  iugcfiium  niaius  fuit  hancnus  arte: 

Forsan  et  hie  merces  dcfit  vtrique  fua. 
Jngenio  tandem  prcBjlafis  Watfo?ius^  et  arte, 

Pieridas  docuit  verba  Britanrui  loqui. 
Et  fa  cites  alijs  aditus  patefecit  ad  art  em. 

Quam  ffiulti  aipiunt  finger e^  netno  refert. 
yjle  tuus  labor  ejl,  lucru??i  ejl  Wat f one ^  tuorum  ; 

Et  tua,  ne  defint  prcBmia,  Laurus  erit. 

^^  T's  feldome  feene  that  Merite  hath  his  due, 
Or  els  Dezerte  to  find  his  iufl  defire  : 
For  nowe  Reproof e  with  his  defacing  crewe 
Treades  vnderfoote  that  rightly  fliould  afpyre : 
Milde  Indufirie  difcourag'd  hides  his  face, 
And  fhuns  the  light,  in  feare  to  meete  Dif^race. 
Seld  feene  faid  I  (yet  alwaies  feene  with  fome) 
That  Merite  gains  good  will,  a  golden  hyre, 
With  whome  Reproofe  is  cafl  afide  for  fcumme ; 
,,    That  growes  apace  that  vertue  helps  t'  afpire  ; 
And  Indufirie  well  chearifh't  to  his  face 
In  funHiine  walkes,  in  fpight  of  fowre  Difgrace, 
This  fauour  hath  put  life  into  the  pen, 
That  heere  prefentes  his  firfl  fniite  in  this  kinde : 
He  hopes  acceptance,  friendly  graunte  it  then ; 
Perchaunce  fome  better  worke  doth  flay  behinde. 
My  cenfure  is,  which  reading  you  fhall  fee, 
A  Pythy,  fweete,  and  cunning  poefye. 
M.  Roydo7i. 


^v,  To  the  A  tit  hour. 

\^f  F  grauer  headdes  fhall  count  it  ouerlight, 

r^  To  treate  of  Loue :  fay  thou  to  them :  AJlaine 

Is  incident  vnto  thefinefi  die. 
And  yet  no  flaine  at  all  it  is  for  thee, 
Thefe  layes  of  Loue,  as  myrth  to  melancholy, 
To  followe  fafl  thy  fad  Antigone, 
Which  may  beare  out  a  broader  worke  then  this, 
Compyl'd  with  iudgement,  order,  and  with  arte. 
And  fhrowde  thee  vnder  fhadowe  of  his  winges, 
Whofe  gentle  heart,  and  head  with  learning  fraight 
Shall  yeld  thee  gracious  fauour  and  defence. 

G.  Peek. 

A    Quatorzain    of    the    Au- 

thour  vnto  this  his  booke 
of  Louepafsi- 


ons. 


)-s^ 


Hjiyyr  Y  llttle  booke  goe  hye  thee  hence  away,    [parte 
Jji^  Whofe  price  (God  know's)  will  countervaile  no 
Of  paines  I  tooke,  to  make  thee  what  thou  arte : 
And  yet  I  ioy  thy  byrth.     But  hence  I  fay, 
Thy  brothers  are  halfe  hurt  by  thy  delaye ; 

For  thou  thy  felfe  arte  like  the  deadly  dart, 

Which  bred  thy  byrth  from  out  my  wounded  hart. 

But  ftill  obferue  this  rule  where  ere  thou  ftaye, 
In  all  thou  mai'fl  tender  thy  fathers  fame, 
„      Bad  is  the  Bird,  that  fileth  his  owne  nejl. 

If  thou  be  much  miflik't.  They  are  to  blame, 
Say  thou,  that  deedes  well  donne  to  euill  wrefl : 

Or  els  confeffe,  A  Toye  to  be  thy  name  ; 
„      This  trifling  world  A  Toye  befeemeth  befl. 


I.  37 


The  Author  in  this  Pafsion  takcth  but  occafion  to  open  his  eflate 
in  loue  ;  the  miferahle  accidentes  whereof  are  fufficiently 
defcribecl  hereafter  in  the  copious  varietie  of  his  deuifes  :  and 
whereas  in  this  Sonnet  he  feemeth  one  while  to  defpaire,  and  yet 
by  and  by  after  to  hauc  fome  hope  of  good  fucccffe,  the  con- 
trarietie  ought  not  to  offend,  if  the  nature  and  true  quaUtie 
of  a  loue  pafsion  bee  well  confidered.  And  where  he  mention- 
eth  that  once  hee  fcorneil  loue,  hee  alludetli  to  a  peece  of  worke, 
whiche  he  wrote  long  fince,  Dc  Rcmcdio  A?)ioris,  which  he  hath 
lately  perfected,  to  the  good  likinge  of  many  that  haue  feene 
and  penifed  it,  though  not  fully  to  his  owne  fancy,  which  caufeth 
him  as  yet  to  kepe  it  backe  from  the  printe. 


WEU  fare  the  life  fometimes  I  ledde  ere  this, 
When  yet  no  downy  heare  yclad  my  face  : 
My  heart  deuoyde  of  cares  did  bath  in  bliffe, 
My  thoughts  were  free  in  euery  time  and  place  : 
But  now  (alas)  all's  fowle,  which  then  was  faire, 
My  wonted  ioyes  are  turning  to  defpaire. 
Where  then  I  liu'd  without  controule  or  check  e, 
An  other  now  is  miflris  of  my  minde, 
Cupid  hath  clapt  a  yoake  vpon  my  necke, 
Vnder  whofe  waighte  I  Hue  in  feruile  kinde  : 
I  now  cry  creake,  that  ere  I  fcorned  loue, 
\Vhofe  might  is  more  then  other  Gods  aboue. 
I  haue  affaide  by  labour  to  efchevve 
What  fancy  buildes  vpon  a  loue  conceite. 
But  nearthelelfe  my  thought  reuiues  anew, 
Where  in  fond  loue  is  wrapt,  and  workes  deceite : 
Some  comfort  yet  I  haue  to  Hue  her  thrall, 
In  whome  as  yet  I  find  no  fault  at  all. 


38  II. 


In  this  pafsion  the  Author  defcribeth  in  how  pitious  a  cafe 
the  hart  of  a  louer  is,  being  (as  he  fayneth  heere)  feperated 
from  his  owne  body,  and  remoued  into  a  darkfome  and 
folitarie  wildernes  of  woes.  The  conueyance  of  his  inuention 
is  plaine  and  pleafant  enough  of  it  felfe,  and  therefore  need- 
eth  the  leffe  annotation  before  it. 


r  Y  harte  is  fett  him  downe  twixt  hope  and  feares 
^yS^  Vpon  the  flonie  banke  of  high  defire, 

To  view  his  own  made  flud  of  blubbering  teares 
Whofe  wanes  are  bitter  fait,  and  hote  as  fire  : 
There  blowes  no  blafl  of  wind  but  ghoflly  grones 
Nor  waues  make  other  noyfe  then  pitious  moanes 
As  life  were  fpent  he  waiteth  Charons  boate, 
And  thinkes  he  dwells  on  fide  of  Stigian  lake  : 
But  blacke  defpaire  fome  times  with  open  throate, 
Or  fpightfull  leloufie  doth  caufe  him  quake, 

With  howlinge  fhrikes  on  him  they  call  and  crie 
That  he  as  yet  fhall  nether  Hue  nor  die : 
Thus  voyde  of  helpe  he  fittes  in  heauie  cafe, 
And  wanteth  voyce  to  make  his  iufl  complaint. 
No  flowr  but  Hiacynth  in  all  the  place, 
No  funne  comes  there,  nor  any  heau'nly  fainte, 
But  onely  Ihee,  which  in  him  felfe  remaines, 
And  ioyes  her  eafe  though  he  abound  in  paines.  2i 


III.  39 


This  pafsion  is  all  framed  in  manner  of  a  dialogue,  wherein 
the  Author  talketh  with  his  owne  heart,  beeing  nowe  through 
the  commandement  and  force  of  loue  feparated  from  his 
bodie  miraculoullie,  and  againfl  nature,  to  follow  his  miflres, 
in  hope,  by  long  attendance  vpon  her,  to  purchafe  in  the  end 
her  loue  and  fauour,  and  by  that  meanes  to  make  him  felfe 
all  one  with  her  owne  heart. 


9^ 

"^•^  Peake  gentle  heart,  where  is  thy  dwelhng  place? 
)With  her,  whofe  birth  the  heauens  themfelues  haue 

blea. 
WTiat  doil  thou  there  ?     Somtimes  behold  her  face, 
And  lodge  fometimes  within  her  criflall  brefl : 
She  cold,  thou  hot,  how  can  you  then  agree  ? 
Not  nature  now,  but  loue  doth  gouerne  me. 
With  her  wilt  thou  remaine,  and  let  mee  die  ? 
If  I  returne,  wee  both  fhall  die  for  griefe : 
If  dill  thou  flaye,  what  good  fhall  growe  thereby  ? 
He  moue  her  heart  to  purchafe  thy  reliefe  : 

What  if  her  heart  be  hard,  and  flop  his  eares  ? 
He  figh  aloud,  and  make  him  foft  with  teares : 
If  that  preuaile,  wilte  thou  returne  from  thence  ? 
Not  I  alone,  her  heart  fhall  come  with  mee  : 
Then  will  you  both  Hue  vnder  my  defence  ? 
So  long  as  life  will  let  vs  both  agree : 

Why  then  difpaire,  goe  packe  thee  hence  away, 
I  Hue  in  hope  to  haue  a  golden  daie. 


40 


I  I  I  I. 


The  chiefe  grounde  and  matter  of  this  Sonnet  ftandeth  vppon 
the  rehearfall  of  fuch  thinges  as  by  reporte  of  the  Poets,  are 
dedicated  vnto  Vemis^  whereof  the  Authour  fometime  wrote 
thefe  three  Latine  verfes. 

Mons  Erycimis,  Acidalms  fans,  alba  cohimba^ 
Hefperiis,  ora  Pathos,  Rofa,  Myrhis,  et  injula  Cyprus, 
Idaliiimqiie  neimis  ;  Veneri  hcec /tint  omnia  facra. 
And  Forcatulus  the  French  Poet  wrote  vppon  the  fame  parti- 
culars, but  more  at  large,  he  beginneth  thus, 
EJl  arbor  Veneri  Myrtus  gratifsima,  flores 

Tarn  Rofa,  quam  volucres  alba  columba  prceit. 
Igniferiiin  coeli prce  cttndlis  diligit  ajiris 

Hefperon,  Idaliicm  fcepe  adit  vna  nemus.  etc. 


^Weete  Venus  if  as  nowe  thou  fland  my  friende, 
As  once  thou  didfl  vnto  Kinge  '^Pi^iams  fonne, 
My  ioyfull  mufe  fhall  neuer  make  an  end 
Of  praifmg  thee,  and  all  that  thou  haft  done  : 
Nor  this  my  penne  fhall  euer  ceafe  to  write 
Of  ought,  wherin  fweete  Venii,s  takes  delite. 

My  temples  hedged  in  with  Myrtle  bowes 

Shall  fet  afide  Apolloes  Lawrell  tree. 

As  did  ^Anchifes  fonne,  when  both  his  browes 

With  Myrtle  hee  befet,  to  honour  thee  : 

Then  will  I  fay,  the  Rofe  of  flowres  is  befl. 
And  filuer  Dooues  for  birdes  excell  the  refl. 

He  praife  no  ftarre  but  Hefperus  alone, 

Nor  any  hill  but  Erycinus  mounte. 

Nor  any  woodde  but  Idaly  alone. 

Nor  any  fpring  but  Acidalian  founte, 

Nor  any  land  but  onely  Cyprus  Ihoare, 

Nor  Gods  but  Loue,  and  what  would  Venus  more? 


1  Paris. 


«  Materna  redimitus  tempora  Mirto.  Virg. 


V.  4' 


All  this  Pafsion  (two  verfes  only  excepted)  is  wholly  tranflated 
out  of  Petrarch,  where  he  writcth, 

iS'  amor  uon  ?,  che  dunque  <?  qttel cJi  i  fento  f       Part  prima  \ 

Ma  segli  <?  amor,  per  Dio  che  co/a,  e  quale  J       Sonnet  103.  j 

Se  bitona,  ond'i  Veffctto  a/pro  e  moriale  t 

Se  ri'a,  ond^^fi.  dolce  ogni  tormaito  f 
Heerein  certaine  contrarieties,  whiche  are  incident  to  him 
that  loueth  extreemelye,  are  liuely  exprefled  by  a  Metaphore. 
And  it  may  be  noted,  that  the  Author  in  his  firfl  halfe  verfe  of 
this  tranflation  varieth  from  that  fenfe,  which  Chaxucer  vfeth 
in  tranflating  the  folfe  fame  :  which  he  doth  vpon  no 
other  warrant  then  his  owne  fimple  priuate  opinion,  which 
yet  he  will  not  greatly  (land  vpon. 


r^F't  bee  not  loue  I  feele,  what  is  it  then? 
If  loue  it  bee,  what  kind  a  thing  is  loue  ? 
If  good,  how  chance  he  hurtes  fo  many  men  ? 
If  badd,  how  happ's  that  none  his  hurtes  difproue  ? 
If  willingly  I  bume,  how  chance  I  waile  ? 
If  gainfl  my  will,  what  forrow  will  auaile  ? 
O  liuefome  death,  O  fweete  and  pleafant  ill, 
A  gainfl  my  minde  how  can  thy  might  preuaile? 
If  I  bend  backe,  and  but  refraine  my  will. 
If  I  confent,  I  doe  not  well  to  waile  ; 
r  And  touching  him,  whome  will  hath  made  a  flaue, 
1  The  Prouerbe  faith  of  olde,  Selfe  doe,  felfe  haiie. 
Thus  beeing  tofl  with  windes  of  fundry  forte 
Through  daung'rous  Seas  but  in  a  flender  Boat, 
With  errour  fluft,  and  driu'n  befide  the  porte, 
AVhere  voide  of  wifdomes  fraight  it  lies  afloate, 
I  waue  in  doubt  what  helpe  I  fhall  require, 
In  Sommer  freeze,  in  winter  burne  like  fire. 

1  Adduntur  Tufcano  hij  duo  verfus. 


:) 


42  VI. 


This  pafsion  is  a  tranflation  into  latine  of  the  felfe  fame 
fonnet  of  Petrarch  which  you  red  laflly  alleaged,  and 
commeth  fomwhat  neerer  vnto  the  Itahan  phrafe  then  the 
Englifli  doth.  The  Author  when  he  tranflated  it,  was  not 
then  minded  euer  to  haue  imboldned  him  felfe  fo  farre, 
as  to  thrufl  in  foote  amongfl  our  enghfh  Poets.  But  beinge 
bufied  in  tranflating  Petrarch  his  fonnets  into  latin  new 
clothed  this  amongfl  many  others,  which  one  day  may  per- 
chance come  to  light :  And  becaufe  it  befitteth  this  place, 
he  is  content  you  furuey  it  here  as  a  probable  figne  of  his 
dayly  fufferance  in  loue. 


^Ocfi  nonfd  amor,  quod perfentifco,  quid  ergo  ejll 


\\] 


Si  fit  amor,  turn  quid  fit  amor  qualifque  rogandum . 
Si  bonus  efi,  vnde  effe^lus  producit  acerbos  2 
Sin  malus,  vnde  eius  tormentum  dulce putatur  1 

Sique  volens  vror,  quce  tanii  caufa  dolor  is  ? 

Sin  inuitus  amo,  quid  me  lamenta  iuuabunt  1 
O  Icethum  viuax,  6  dele^ahile  damnum, 
Quific  mefuperes,  tibifii  concedere  nolim  ? 

Et  mefipafior  vinci,  cur  lugeo  villus  ? 

Aduerfis  rapior  ventis,  nulloque  magifiro, 
Per  maris  effufi  flu^us,  in  puppe  caduca, 

QucB  vacua  ingenio,  tantoque  error e  grauata  efi, 
Ipfus  vt  ignorem  de  me  quid  dicere  pojfim  : 
Frigeo,  dum  media  efi  ce/las ;  dum  bruma,  calefco. 


VII.  43 


This  pafsion  of  loue  is  liuely  exprcffed  by  the  Authour,  in  that 
he  lauifhlie  praifetii  the  perfon  and  beautifull  omamentes 
of  his  loue,  one  after  an  other  as  they  lie  in  order.  He  partly  imi- 
tateth  herein  Af/was  Siluius,  who  fetteth'dovvne  the  like  in  de- 
fcribing  Lucrdia  the  loue  of  Euryalus  ;  and  partly  he  followeth 
Ariojlocant.  7.  where  he  defcribethy4/r///a  :  and  partly  borroweth 
from  fome  others  where  they  defcribe  the  famous  Helen  of  Greece: 
you  may  therefore,  if  you  pleafeaptlie  call  thisfonnet  asaScholler 
of  good  iudgement  hath  already  Chriflened  it  Sllvt]  wapaatTiKT]. 


Mpy Arke  you  that  lift  to  heare  what  fainte  I  feme : 
(^^  Her  yellowe  lockes  exceede  the  beaten  goulde ; 

Her  fparkeHng  eies  in  heau'n  a  place  defeme ; 

Her  forehead  high  and  faire  of  comely  moulde  ; 
Her  wordes  are  muficke  all  of  filuer  founde ; 
Her  wit  fo  fharpe  as  like  can  fcarfe  be  found  : 
Each  eybrowe  hanges  like  Iris  in  the  fkies  ; 
1  Her  Eagles  nofe  is  flraight  of  flately  frame ; 
On  either  cheeke  a  Rofe  and  Lillie  lies ; 
Her  breath  is  fweete  perfume,  or  hollie  flame; 

Her  lips  more  red  than  any  Corall  flone ; 

Her  necke  more  white,  then  aged  ^ Swans  yat  mone ; 
Her  bred  tranfparent  is,  like  Chri/iall  iock.Q] 
Her  fingers  long,  fit  for  Apolloes  Lute ; 
Her  flipper  fuch  as  ^Momus  dare  not  mocke; 
Her  vertues  all  fo  great  as  make  me  mute: 

What  other  partes  (he  hath  I  neede  not  fay, 

Whofe  face  alone  is  caufe  of  my  decaye. 

*  Nasus    Aquilinus    ex    Persarum        8  Vide  Chiliad  i.  cent.  5  adag.  74. 
opinione  maiestatem  personae  arguit.      vbi   Erasm.  ex  Philostrati  ad  vxorem 

'  Quale  suo  recinit  funere  carmen     epistola  mutuatur. 
Olor.   Strozza.  et  vide  Plin.  de  cantu 
Olorino  lib.  10.  nat.  hist.  cap.  23. 


44  V  I  I  I. 


Atflceon  for  efpying  Diana  as  fhee  bathed  her  naked,  was 
transformed  into  a  Hart,  and  fone  after  tome  in  pieces  by  his 
owne  houndes,  as  Otiid  defcribeth  at  large  lib.  3.  Metamorph^ 
And  Siliusltalictts  libr.  12.  de  bello  Punico  ^diVince.\h.  at  it  in  this 
manner. 

Fama  ejl^  cum  laceris  Adlceon  flebile  membris 
SiippUcium  lueret  fpe(flat<B  infonte  Dianoe^ 
Attonitum  nouitate  mala  fugijfe parentem 
Perfi'eta  Arijiceiwi.  etc. 
The  Author  alluding  in  al  this  Pafsion  vnto  the  fault  of  Adlcson^ 
and  to  the  hurte,  which  hee  fufteined,  fetteth  downe  his  owne 
amorous  infelicitie  ;  as  Quid  did  after  his  banifhmente,  when 
in  an  other  fenfe  hee  applied  this  fidlion  vnto  himfelfe,   being 
exiled  (as  it  fhould  feeme)  for  hauing  at  vna wares  taken  Ccefar 
in  fome  great  fault :  for  thus  hee  writeth. 

Cur  aliquid  vidi,  cur  noxia  luminafecil  etc. 
Infcius  AdlcEon  mditfme  vejie  Dianam, 
Frcedafuit  canibus  nee  minus  illefuis. 


j"^  CV^^;^  lofl  in  middle  of  his  fport 
d^  Both  fhape  and  hfe,  for  looking  but  a  wry, 
Diana  was  afraid  he  would  report 
What  fecretes  he  had  feene  in  paffing  by : 

To  tell  but  trueth,  the  felfe  fame  hurt  haue  I 
By  viewing  her,  for  whome  I  dayly  die ; 
I  leefe  my  woonted  fhape,  in  that  my  minde 
Doth  fuffer  wracke  vpon  the  flonie  rocke 
Of  her  difdaine,  who  contrary  to  kinde 
Doth  beare  a  brefl  more  harde  then  any  flocke ; 
And  former  forme  of  limmes  is  changed  quite 
By  cares  in  loue,  and  want  of  due  delight. 
I  leefe  my  life  in  that  each  fecret  thought, 
Which  I  conceiue  through  wanton  fond  regard, 
Doth  make  me  fay,  that  life  auaileth  nought 
Where  feruice  cannot  haue  a  due  reward  : 

I  dare  not  name  the  Nimph  that  works  my  fmart, 
Though  loue  hath  grau'n  her  name  within  my  hart. 


IX.  45 


riytia  (as  Ptrottus  witncfTeth)  was  a  glorious  Nimph,  and  thereof 
had  her  name :  for  kX^os  in  greekc  fignifiethglorie  :  and  therfore 
flieafpiredtobetheloueof  ^t^/him  felfe,  who  \)\x{^x\m^  Leiuothoe 
before  her,  flie  was  in  fliort  fpace  oucrgonne  with  fiiche  extrem- 
itie  of  care,  that  by  compafhon  of  the  Gods  (hce  was  tranfformed 
into  a  Marigolde  ;  svliich  is  significantlie  called  Heliotropium^ 
becaufe  euen  nowe  after  change  of  fomie  fhee  ftill  obferueth 
the  rifing  and  going  downe  of  liir  beloued  the  funne,  as  Ouid 
mentioneth, 

yila/inim,  quamtiis  radice  teneiur, 
Vertititr  ad  Solan,  mutataque  fcruat  ainoTcm.     Met.-im.  lib.  4. 

And  by  this  it  maie  eafilie  bee  gheffed,  whie  in  this  paflion  the 
Authour  compareth  him  felfe  with  the  Marigold,  and  his 
loue  vnto  the  Siuuie. 


He  Marigold  fo  likes  the  louely  Sunne, 
That  when  he  fettes  the  other  hides  her  face, 
And  when  he  ginnes  his  morning  courfe  to  runne, 
She  fpreades  abroad,  and  fhowes  her  greatefl  grace; 
So  fhuts  or  fprouts  my  ioy,  as  doth  this  flow're, 
WTien  my  Sheefiuine  doth  either  laugh  or  lowre. 
WTien  fhee  departes  my  fight,  I  die  for  paine, 
In  clofmg  vp  my  hearte  with  cloudie  care ; 
And  yet  when  once  I  viewe  her  face  againe, 
I  flreight  reuiue,  and  ioye  my  wonted  fare  : 

Therewith  my  heart  ofte  faies,  when  all  is  done, 
That  heau'n  and  earth  haue  not  a  brighter  funne. 
A  iealous  thought  yet  puttes  my  minde  In  feare, 
Left  lone  him  felfe  defcending  from  his  throne 
Shoulde  take  by  ftealth  and  place  her  in  his  fpheare, 
Or  in  fome  higher  globe  to  rule  alone  :       [their  praye 
Which   if  he   fhould,  the   heau'ns  might   boaft 
But  I  (alas)  might  curfe  yat  difmall  day. 


46  X. 

The  Authour  hath  made  two  or  three  other  pafllons  vpon  this 
matter  that  is  heere  conteined,  alluding  to  the  loffe  of  his 
fight  and  life  fmce  the  time  he  firft  beheald  her  face,  whofe 
loue  hath  thus  bewitched  him.  But  heere  hee  mentioneth, 
the  blindneffe  of  Tyrefias  to  proceed  of  an  other  caufe,  then 
he  doth  in  thofe  his  other  Sonnettes,  And  heerein  he  leaneth 
not  to  the  opinion  of  the  greater  forte  of  Poets,  but  vnto  fome 
fewe,  after  whom  Polytian  hath  written  alfo,  as  followeth ; 

Baculum  dat  deinde  petentem 
TyreficE  magni,  qui  quonda?n  Pallada  nudam 
Vidit,  et  hoc  raptam  peiifaidt  munere  liicem. 
Suetus  in  offenfos  baailo  duce  tendere  grejpiis 
Nee  deejl  ipfejibi,  quinfaero  injimdla  furore 
Ora  mouety  tantiqice parat folatia  damni. 

N]|Y/[r  Yne  ^eyes  dye  firfl,  which  lafl  emoyed  hfe, 
})SA  Not  hurt  by  bleared  eies,  but  hurt  with  light 
Of  fuch  a  blazing  ftarre  as  kindeleth  flrife 
Within  my  breft  as  well  by  day  as  night : 
And  yet  no  poyfned  Cockatrice  lurk't  there, 
Hervertuous  beames  diffuadefuch  foolifh  feare. 
Befides,  I  Hue  as  yet ;  though  blinded  nowe 
Like  him,  that  fawe  Mineruaes  naked  fide, 
And  loll  his  fight  (poore  foule)  not  knowing  howe ; 
Or  like  to  him,  whome  euill  chance  betide. 
In  ftraying  farre  to  light  vpon  that  place. 
Where  midfl  a  fount  he  founde  Dianaes  grace. 
But  he  alone,  who  Polyphemus  hight, 
Trewe  patterne  was  of  me  and  all  my  woe. 
Of  all  the  reft  that  euer  loft  their  fight : 
For  being  blinde,  yet  loue  poffeft  him  fo. 

That  he  each  how'r  on  eu'ry  dale  and  hill 
Sung  fonges  of  loue  to  2  Galatcea  ftill. 

^  Quod  naturale  esse,  ait  Plinius        2  Calatcea  was  a  water  Nymph  and 
lib.  ii.  natur.  hist  c.  36.  daughter  to  old  Nereits. 


XI.  47 


In  this  fonnet  is  couertly  fet  forth,  how  pleafaunt  a  pafTion  the 
Author  one  day  enioyed,  when  by  chance  he  ouerharde  his 
miflris,  whilfl  flie  was  Tinging  priuately  by  her  felfe  :  And 
fone  after  into  howe  forrowfull  a  dumpe,  or  founden  extafie 
he  fell,  when  vpon  the  firfl  fight  of  him  flie  abruptlie  fini- 
flied  her  fon<:  and  melodic. 


\^  Goulden  bird  and  Phtnix  of  our  age, 
WTiofe  fweete  records  and  more  then  earthly  voice 
By  wondrous  force  did  then  my  griefe  affwage 
When  nothing  els  could  make  my  heart  reioyce, 
Thy  teunes  (no  doubt)  had  made  a  later  end, 
If  thou  hadfl  knowen  how  much  they  flood  myfrend. 
When  filence  dround  the  latter  warbling  noate, 
A  fudden  griefe  eclypil  my  former  ioye, 
^[y  life  it  felfe  in  calling  Caro?is  boate 
Did  figh,  and  fay,  that  pleafure  brought  anoy ; 

And  blam'd  mine  eare  for  liflning  to  the  found 
Of  fuch  a  fonge,  as  had  increafl  my  wound. 
My  heauie  heart  remembring  what  was  pad 
Did  forrowe  more  than  any  tounge  can  tell ; 
As  did  the  damned  foules  that  floode  agafl, 
When  Orpheus  with  his  wife  retum'd  from  hell : 

Yet  who  would  think,  that  Mufike  which  is  fwete, 
In  curing  paines  could  caufe  delites  to  fleete  ? 


48  X  I  I. 


The  fubie6t  of  this  paffion  is  all  one  with  that,  which  is  next  before 
it :  but  that  the  Authour  fomwhat  more  highly  here  extoUeth 
his  ladies  excellencie,  both  for  the  fmgularitie  of  her  voyce, 
and  her  wonderfull  arte  in  vfe  and  moderation  of  the  fame. 
But  moreouer,  in  this  fonnet,  the  Authour  relateth  how  after 
the  hearing  of  his  miftris  fing,  his  afifecflion  towardes  her  by  that 
meanes  was  more  vehemently  kindled,  then  it  had  bin  at  any 
time  before. 


vS^  Memaile  I,  why  poets  heretofore 

(A  Extold  1  Arions  harp  or  Mercuries^ 

Although  the  one  did  bring  a  fifhe  to  fhore, 
And  th'  other  as  a  ^  figne  adorn'd  the  fkies. 
Yf  they  with  me  had  heard  an  Angells  voice, 
They  would  vnfay  them  felues,  and  praife  my  choife. 

Not  Philomela  now  deferues  the  price, 

Though  fweetely  fhe  recount  her  caufe  of  mone  : 

Nor  Fhcebus  arte  in  muficall  deuife, 

Although  his  lute  and  voyce  accord  in  one ; 
Muficke  her  felf,  and  all  the  Mufes  nine, 
For  fkil  or  voyce  their  titles  may  refigne. 

O  bitter  fweete,  or  hunny  mixt  with  gall, 

My  hart  is  hurt  with  ouermuch  delight, 

Mine  eares  wel  pleaf'd  with  tunes,  yet  deafe  with  all : 

Through  muficks  helpe  loue  hath  increafl  his  might ; 
I  floppe  mine  eares  as  wife  Vliffes  bad, 
But  all  to  late,  now  loue  hath  made  me  mad. 

1  Sic  methymnseo  gauisus  Arione        ^  Consurgente    freto    cedit    Lyra 
Delphin,  Martial,  lib.  8.  Cyllenaea  Ruff.  Fest. 


X  I  J  I.  49 


The  Autliour  defcanteth  on  fonvarde  vpon  the  late  effe^l,  which 
the  fong  of  his  Miflrcs  haili  wrought  in  him,  by  augmenting 
the  heate  of  his  former  louc.  Antl  in  this  paiTion  after  he  hath 
fet  downe  fome  miraculous  good  effedles  of  Muficke,  hee  falleth 
into  queftion  with  him  felfe,  what  (hould  be  the  caufe,  why  the 
fweete  melodie  of  his  Miftres  fliouldc  fo  much  hurte  him,  con- 
trarie  to  the  kindc  and  nalure  of  niuficall  harmonie. 


Scic'J>ujii  {\\d  ctirc  with  trumpets  foiinde 
iJ^Such  men  as  firll  had  lofl  their  hearing  quite: 
And  many  fuch  as  in  their  drinke  lay  drown d 
Damon  reuiu'd  with  tunes  of  graue  delight: 

And  Theophrajl  when  ought  his  minde  opprefl, 
Vfd  mufickes  helpe  to  bring  him  felfe  to  refl: 
With  founde  of  harpe  Thales  did  make  recure 
Of  fuch  as  lay  with  peflilence  forlome : 
With  Organ  pipes  Xenocrates  made  pure 
Theire  ^^^ts,  whofe  mindes  long  Lunacy  had  wonie : 
Howe  comes  it  then,  that  mufick  in  my  minde 
Enforceth  caufe  of  hurt  againfl  her  kinde? 
For  fmce  I  heard  a  fecret  heau'nly  fong, 
Loue  hath  fo  -wTOught  by  vertue  of  conceite, 
That  I  fhall  pine  vpon  fuppofed  -wrong 
VnlefTe  fhee  yeelde,  that  did  mee  fuch  deceit: 

O  eares  now  deafe,  O  \vits  al  drownd  in  cares, 
O  heart  furpryf'd  with  plagues  at  vnawares. 


50  XI 1 1 1. 


The  Authour  ftill  purfuing  his  inuention  vpon  the  fong  of  his 
Miflres,  in  the  laft  flaffe  of  this  fonnet  he  falleth  into  this 
fi6lion :  that  whilefl  he  greedehe  laied  open  his  eares  to  the 
hearing  of  his  Ladies  voice,  as  one  more  then  halfe  in  a  doubt, 
that  Apollo  him  felfe  had  beene  at  hand,  Loue  efpiyng  a  time 
of  aduantage,  tranfformed  him  felfe  into  the  fubftance  of  aier, 
and  fo  deceitfullie  entered  into  him  with  his  owne  great  good- 
will and  defire,  and  nowe  by  mayne  force  ftill  holdeth  his 
poffeffion. 


%lfOme  that  reporte  great  Alexanders  life, 
(j^jThey  fay,  that  harmonie  fo  mou'd  his  mind, 
That  oft  he  roafe  from  meat  to  wariike  flrife 
At  founde  of  Trumpe,  or  noyfe  of  battle  kind. 
And  then,  that  mufickes  force  of  fofter  vaine 
Cauf'd  him  returne  from  flrokes  to  meat  againe. 
And  as  for  me,  I  thinke  it  nothing  flrange, 
That  mufick  hauing  birth  from  heau'ns  aboue. 
By  diuers  tunes  can  make  the  minde  to  change : 
For  I  my  felfe  in  hearing  my  fweete  Lone, 
By  vertue  of  her  fong  both  tafled  griefe. 
And  fuch  delight,  as  yeelded  fome  reliefe. 
When  firft  I  gan  to  giue  attentiue  eare, 
Thinking  Apolloes  voice  did  haunte  the  place, 
I  little  thought  my  Lady  had  beene  there : 
But  whileft  mine  eares  lay  open  in  this  cafe, 

Transform'd  to  ayre  Loue  entred  with  my  will, 
And  nowe  perforce  doth  keepe  poffeffion  flill. 


XV.  51 


Still  hee  followeth  on  with  further  deuife  vppon  the  late  Melodic 
of  his  Miftres:  and  in  this  fonnet  doth  namelic  prcfeiTC  her 
before  MiiQcke  her  felfe,  and  all  the  three  Graces ;  affirming,  if 
either  he,  or  els  Apollo  bee  ordeined  a  iudgc  to  giue  fentence  of 
their  defertes  on  either  fide,  that  then  his  Ladie  can  not  faile 
to  beare  both  pricke  and  prize  awaie. 


fOwe  Muficke  hide  thy  flice  or  blufli  for  fhame, 
Since  thou  hafl  heard  hir  (kill  and  warbling  voice, 
Who  far  beefore  thy  felfe  deferu's  thy  name, 
And  for  a  Science  fhould  bee  had  in  cl-jlf:: 
Or  if  thou  (lill  thy  title  wilt  retaine, 
Equall  hir  fong  with  helpe  of  all  thy  traine. 
But  as  I  deeme,  it  better  were  to  yeelde 
Thy  place  to  her,  to  whom  the  price  belonges, 
Then  after  flrife  to  leefe  both  fame  and  field. 
For  though  rude  Satyres  like  of  Marfias  fonges, 
And  Choridon  efleeme  his  oaten  quill: 
Compare  them  with  hir  voice,  and  both  are  ill. 
Nay,  which  is  more,  bring  forth  the  Graces  three, 
And  each  of  them  let  fmg  hir  fong  apart. 
And  who  doth  befl.  twill  foone  appeare  by  mee. 
When  fhee  fhall  make  replie  which  rules  my  heart : 
Or  if  you  needes  will  make  Apollo  iudge. 
So  fure  I  am  to  winne  I  neede  not  grudge. 


5.  XVI. 


In  this  paffion  the  Authour  vpon  the  late  fweete  fong  of  his  Miflres, 
maketh  her  his  birde;  and  therwithall  parthe  defcribeth  her 
worthines,  and  partlie  his  owne  eftate.  The  one  parte  he 
fheweth,  by  the  coulour  of  her  feathers,  by  her  flatehe  minde, 
and  by  that  fouereintie  which  fhe  hath  ouer  him :  the  other, 
by  defcriptiou  of  his  delight  in  her  companie,  and  her  ftrangenes, 
and  drawing  backe  from  a  dewe  acceptance  of  his  feruice. 


^    ^  Y  gentle  birde,  which  fung  fo  fweete  of  late, 


-r  —  Is  not  like  thofe,  that  flie  about  by  kind, 

Her  feathers  are  of  golde,  fhee  wantes  a  mate. 
And  knowing  wel  her  worth,  is  proud  of  mind : 
And  wheras  fom  do  keepe  their  birds  in  cage. 
My  bird  keepes  mee,  and  rules  me  as  hir  page. 
She  feedes  mine  eare  with  tunes  of  rare  delight, 
Mine  eye  with  louing  lookes,  my  heart  with  ioy, 
Wherhence  I  thinke  my  feruitude  but  light, 
Although  in  deede  I  fuffer  great  annoye : 
And  (fure)  it  is  but  reafon,  I  fuppofe, 
He  feele  the  pricke,  that  feekes  to  pluck  the  Rofe. 
And  who  fo  mad,  as  woulde  not  with  his  will 
Leefe  libertie  and  life  to  heare  her  fmg, 
Whofe  voice  excels  thofe  harmonies  that  fill 
Elifian  fieldes,  where  growes  eternall  fpring  ? 

If  mightie  loue  fhould  heare  what  I  haue  hard. 
She  (fure)  were  his,  and  all  my  market  marde. 


<i 


XVII.  53 


The  Author  not  yet  hauing  forgotten  the  fonge  of  his  miflres, 
maketh  her  in  this  palTion  a  secondc  P/tootix,  though  not  of 
Arabia,  and  yet  no  lefi'e  acceptable  to  Apollo,  then  is  that  bird 
of  Arabia.  And  the  cheife  caufes  why  Sol  ftioulde  fauour  hir, 
he  accountcth  to  be  tliefe  two,  hir  excellent  beawtie,  and  hir 
skill  in  mufike,  of  which  two  qualities  Sol  is  well  knowen  to  be 
an  efpeciall  cheife  patrone,  and  fometimes  the  only  author  or 
giuer  of  the  fame. 


F  Poets  haue  done  well  in  times  long  pail, 
J^C)  To  glofe  on  trifling  toyes  of  little  price : 
Why  fliould  not  I  prefume  to  faine  as  fafl, 
Efpying  forth  a  ground  of  good  deuife  ? 

A  Sacred  Nimph  is  ground  whereon  ile  \mte, 
The  fairefl  Nifnph  that  euer  yet  faw  light. 
And  fince  her  fong  hath  fild  mine  eares  with  ioyc, 
Hir  vertues  pleafd  my  mindc,  hir  face  mine  eye, 
I  dare  afiirme  what  fome  will  thinke  a  toy, 
She  Fhcenix  is,  though  not  of  Arable ; 

And  yet  the  plumes  about  hir  neck  are  bright, 
And  Sol  him  felfe  in  her  hath  chiefe  delight.^ 
You  that  ^vill  know  why  Sol  afoordes  her  loue, 
Seeke  but  the  cawfe  why  Peakocks  draw  the  place, 
^\^lere  Imio  fitts ;  why  Venus  likes  the  Done ; 
Or  why  the  Ozc'le  befitts  Mineruaes  grace; 

Then  yf  you  grudge,  that  fhe  to  Sol  belonge, 
Marke  but  hir  face,  and  heare  hir  skill  in  fonge. 

1  Vide  Plinium  Natur.  hist  lib.  lo  cap.  2. 


54 


XVIII. 


This  fofinet  is  perfedly  patheticall,  and  confifteth  in  two  princi- 
pal! pointes :  wherof  the  firft  conteyneth  an  accufation  of  Loue 
for  his  hurtfull  effe(5ls  and  vfuall  tyrannic ;  the  fecond  part  is  a 
fudden  recantation  or  excufe  of  the  Authors  euill  words,  by 
caftinge  the  fame  vpon  the  necke  of  his  beloued,  as  being  the 
onely  caufe  of  his  late  frenzy  and  blafpheamous  rage  fo  lauifhly 
powred  forth  in  fowle  fpeaclies. 


fflfrSOue  is  a  fowr  delight;  a  fugred  greefe; 
A^A  liuinge  death;  an  euerdying  life; 

A  breache  of  Reafons  lawe;  a  fecret  theefe; 

A  fea  of  teares;  an  euerlafling  flrife; 

A  bayte  for  fooles;  a  fcourge  of  noble  witts; 
A  Deadly  wound;  a  fhotte  which  euer  hitts. 
Loue  is  a  blinded  God;  an  angry  boye; 
A  Labyrinth  of  dowbts;  an  ydle  lufl; 
A  flaue  to  Beawties  will;  a  witles  toy; 
A  rauening  bird,  a  tyraunt  mofl  vniufl; 

A  burning  heate;  A  cold;  a  flattring  foe; 

A  priuate  hell;  a  very  world  of  woe. 
Yet  mightie  Loue  regard  not  what  I  faye, 
Which  lye  in  traunce  bereft  of  all  my  witts, 
But  blame  the  light  that  leades  me  thus  aflraye. 
And  makes  my  tongue  blafpheme  by  frantike  fitts: 

Yet  hurt  her  not,  lefl  I  fufleyne  the  fmart. 

Which  am  content  to  lodge  her  in  my  heart. 


X  I  X.  55 


"Pie  Author  in  this  pafsion  reproueth  the  vfii.ill  dcfcription  of 
loue ;  which  okle  Poetes  haue  fo  ioni;  time  embraced :  and 
proueth  by  probabilities  that  he  neither  is  a  childe  (as  they  say) 
nor  blinde,  nor  winged  Uke  abirde,  nor  armed  archer  hke  with 
bowe  and  arrowes,  neither  frantike,  nor  wife,  nor  yet  vncloathed, 
nor  (to  conclude)  anie  God  at  all.  And  yel  when  he  hath  faid 
al  he  can  to  this  end,  he  cryeth  out  vpon  tb.e  fecret  nature  and 
qualitie  of  Loue,  as  being  that,  whereunio  he  can  by  no  meancs 
attaine,  although  he  haue  fpent  a  long  and  tedious  courfe  of 
liaie  in  lus  feru.ce. 


F  Cupid  were  a  childe,  as  Pods  faine, 
How  comes  it  then  that  Alars  doth  feare  his  might  ? 
If  blind;  how  chance  fo  many  to  theire  paine, 
"Whom  he  hath  hitte,  can  witnelTe  of  his  fight  ? 
If  he  haue  mngs  to  flie  where  thinkes  him  befl, 
How  happes  he  lurketh  flill  within  my  brefl  ? 
If  bowe  and  fliaftes  fliould  be  his  chiefefl  tooles, 
\V'hy  doth  he  fet  fo  many  heartes  on  fire  ? 
If  he  were  madde,  how  could  he  further  fooles 
To  whet  theire  wits,  as  place  and  time  require  ? 
If  wife,  how  could  fo  many  leeze  theire  wittes. 
Or  doate  through  loue,  and  dye  in  frantike  fittes  ? 
If  naked  (lill  he  wander  too  and  froe, 
How  doth  not  Sunne  or  frofl  offend  his  Ikinne  ? 
If  that  a  God  he  be,  how  falles  it  fo, 
That  all  wants  end,  which  he  doth  once  beginne  ? 

O  wondrous  thing,  that  I,  whom  Loue  hath  fpent, 
Can  fcarcely  knowe  him  felf,  or  his  intent. 


S6 


XX. 


In  this  paffion  the  Authour  being  ioyfull  for  a  kiffe,  which  he  had 
receiued  of  his  Loue^  compareth  the  fame  vnto  that  kiffe,  which 
fometime  Venus  beftowed  vpon  Aefculapius,  for  hauing  taken 
a  Bramble  out  of  her  foote,  which  pricked  her  through  the 
hidden  fpitefull  deceyte  of  Diana,  by  whom  it  was  laied  in  her 
way,  as  Strozza  writeth.  And  hee  enlargeth  his  inuention  vppon 
the  french  prouerbiall  fpeech,  which  importeth  thus  much  in 
efifedl,  that  three  things  proceed  from  the  mouth,  which  are  to 
be  had  in  high  account,  Breath,  Speech,  and  Kisfmg;  the  firfl 
argueth  a  mans  life;  the  fecond,  his  thought;  the  third  and 
laft,  his  loue. 


N  time  long  pafl,  when  in  Dianaes  chafe 
z^)  A  bramble  bufh  prickt  Venus  in  the  foote, 
Olde  j^fculapius  healpt  her  heauie  cafe 
Before  the  hurte  had  taken  any  roote :  [hard 

Wherehence  although  his  beard  were  crifping 
She  yeelded  him  a  kiffe  for  his  rewarde. 
My  lucke  was  like  to  his  this  other  day, 
When  fhe,  whom  I  on  earth  do  worfliip  mofl, 
For  kifsing  me  vouchfafed  thus  to  fay, 
Take  this  for  once,  and  make  thereof  no  bofl : 

^  Forthwith  my  heart  gaue  figne  of  ioy  by  fl<:ippes, 
As  though  our  foules  had  ioynd  by  ioyning  lippes. 
And  fmce  that  time  I  thought  it  not  amiffe 
To  iudge  which  were  the  beft  of  all  theie  three; 
Her  breath,  her  fpeach,  or  that  her  daintie  kiffe. 
And  (fure)  of  all  the  kiffe  beft  liked  me : 

For  that  was  it,  which  did  reuiue  my  hart 
Opprefl  and  almofl  deade  with  dayly  fmart. 

1  Siquidem  opinati  sunt  aliqui,  in  osculo  fieri  animarum  combinatienem. 


XXI.  57 


In  the  fird  ftafTe  of  this  paflion  the  Authour  imitateth  Petrarch^ 
Sotutto  211. 

Chi  zmol  veder  qiiantiinque  fuh  Natura 
El  cid  tra  noi,  vctiga  a  mirar  cojlci^  etc. 

And  the  very  like  fenfe  hath  Seraphifte  in  one  of  his  Stramboiti, 
wlaere  he  beginnetli  thus, 

C/ii  zuol  ju-diK gran  cofe  alticre  e  nttoue, 
I'lNga  a  mirar  cojiei,  laquale  adoro: 
Done  gratia  dal  del  continuo  J>ioue.  etc. 


ijTT  THo  lifl  to  vewe  dame  Natures  cunning  fkil, 
jTv^  And  fee  what  heau'n  hath  added  to  the  fame, 
Let  him  prepare  with  me  to  gaze  his  fill 
On  her  apafe,  whofe  gifts  exceed  ye  trump  of  fame : 
But  let  him  come  a  pafe  before  fhe  flye 
From  hence,  to  fixe  her  feate  aboue  the  fkye. 
By  Iimoes  gift  fhe  beares  a  flately  grace, 
Pallas  hath  placed  fkill  amidd'fl  her  breft; 
Venus  her  felfe  doth  dwell  within  her  face; 
Alas  I  faint  to  thinke  of  all  the  reft; 

And  fhall  I  tell  wherewith  I  moll  haue  warres? 
With  thofe  her  eyes,  which  are  two  heau'nly  flarres. 
Theire  beames  drawe  forth  by  great  attractiue  power 
My  moiflned  hart,  whofe  force  is  yet  fo  fmall, 
That  fhine  they  bright,  or  lift  they  but  to  lowre, 
It  fcarcely  dare  behold  fuch  lights  at  all, 

^  But  fobbes,  and  fighes,  and  faith  I  am  vndonne ; 
No  bird  but  loues  can  looke  againfl  the  funne. 

'  Vide  Plin.  nat.  hist  lib.  lo.  cap.  3.  Seraphinum  soneL  i.  vbi  de  aquila 
et  lib  2p  cap.  6.  qui  de  hac  re  mutuatur  suisque  puUis  per  comparationcm  le- 
ex   Anstotelis  historia.       Porrd  vide     gantissime  canit 


58  XXII. 


The  fubflance  of  this  pafsion  is  taken  out  of  Seraphine  fonetto 
127.  which  beginneth  thus. 

Quando  nafcejli  amor?  quando  la  terra 
Se  rinuejle  di  verde  e  bel  colore ; 
Di  chefujli  creato?  d''vn  ardore, 
Che  cio  lafciuo  infe  rinchiude  eferra  etc. 

But  the  Author  hath  in  this  tranflation  inuerted  the  order  of 
fome  verfes  oi  Seraphine,  and  added  the  two  lafl  of  himfelfe  to 
make  the  refl  to  feeme  the  more  patheticall. 


WHen  werte  thou  borne  fweet  Louel  who  was  thy 
^^^  When  Flora  firfl  adorn'd  Dame  Tellus  lap,   [fire? 
Then  fprung  I  forth  from  Wanton  hole  defirc. 
Who  was  thy  nurfe  to  feede  thee  firfl  with  pap? 
Youth  firfl  with  tender  hand  bound  vp  my 

heade, 
Then  faide,  with  Lookes  alone  T  fhould  be  fed; 
What  maides  had  fhe  attendant  on  her  fide, 
To  playe,  to  fmge,  to  rocke  thee  fafl  a  fleepe? 
Vaine  Nice?ieff'e,  Beautie  Faire^  and  Pompeous  Frlde\ 
By  flealth  when  further  age  on  thee  did  creepe; 

Where  didfl  thou  make  thy  chiefe  abiding  place? 
In  Willing  Hartes,  which  were  of  gentle  race ; 
What  if't  wherewith  thou  wageft  warres  with  me? 
Feare  colde  as  Ife,  and  Hope  as  hote  as  fire ; 
And  can  not  age  or  death  make  end  of  thee? 
No,  no,  my  dying  life  flill  makes  retire; 

Why  then  fweete  Lotie  take  pittie  on  my  paine, 
Which  often  dye,  and  oft  reuiue  againe. 


XXIII.  59 


The  Author  in  this  pafsion  wiflieth  he  were  in  like  eflate  and 
condition  with  the  Looking  Glajffe  of  his  miflres ;  by  that  meanes 
the  oftner  to  be  made  happie  with  her  fauourable  and  faire 
afpe<5l.  And  in  the  lafl  flaffe  he  alludeth  fomewhat  to  the 
inuention  of  Seraphine,  where  he  vfeth  thefe  words,  in  writing 
vpon  the  Glajfc  of  his  beloued. 

Che  ho  vijlo  ogtti  qual  vetro  render  foco 
Quando  i  dal  Sol percoffo  in  qiialche  parte^ 
F'l  Sol  cJu  in  gliocchi  toi  dando  in  quel  loco 
Douria  per  reflexion  tutta  infiammarte  etc. 


^np  Hou  G/aJ/e,  wherein  that  Sunne  deHghtes  to  fee 
\\  Her  OTVTi  afpect,  whofe  beams  haue  dride  my  hart, 
Would  God  I  might  poffefTe  like  flate  with  thee, 
And  ioy  fome  eafe  to  quaile  my  bitter  fmart : 
Thou  gazefl  on  her  face,  and  fhe  on  thine ; 
I  fee  not  hers,  nor  (he  will  looke  on  mine. 
Once  hauing  lookt  her  fill,  fhe  turnes  thee  froe, 
And  leaues  thee,  though  amaz'd,  yet  wel  content ; 
But  carelelTe  of  my  cares,  will  I  or  noe, 
Still  dwells  within  my  breafl  with  tears  befprent ; 
And  yet  my  hart  to  her  is  fuch  a  thrall. 
That  she  driu'n  out,  my  life  departs  withall. 
But  thou  deceitful!  Glaffe  (I  feare)  with  guyle 
Hafl  wrought  my  woes  to  fhield  thy  felfe  from  ill, 
Shot  forth  her  beames  which  were  in  thee  erewhile, 
And  burnt  my  tender  brefl  againft  my  will : 

For  Chrijlall  from  it  felfe  reflectes  the  Sunne 
And  fyres  his  coate,  which  knows  not  how  tis  done. 


6o  XXI 1 1 1, 


Seraphim  in  his  Stra?nbotti  hath  many  prettie  inuentions  concern- 
ing the  Lookingglaffe  of  his  Miftres :  wherhence  many  par- 
ticulars of  this  paffion  are  cunningly  borrowed,  part  beeing  out 
of  one  place,  and  part  out  of  another.  And  in  the  latter  end 
is  placed  this  fi(flion  by  the  Authour,  that  Cupid  shooting  his 
arrowe  from  out  the  faire  eies  of  his  Miftres,  did  fo  wounde 
him  with  loue  and  defire,  that  now  he  is  paft  all  recure  by  any 
phificke,  and  therefore  is  faine  to  vfe  the  olde  verfe, 
Hei  mihi  quod  nullis  amor  ejl  medicabilis  herbis. 


wft}  Hou  glaffe,  wherein  my  Dame  hath  fuch  deHght, 


l-5)^^As  when  Ihe  braues,  then  mofl  on  thee  to  gaze, 
I  maruel  howe  her  beames  that  are  fo  bright 
Do  neuer  caufe  thy  brittle  fides  to  craze : 

Thou  fliould'fl  by  reafon  mealt  or  eafly  breake 
To  feele  fuch  force,  thy  fubdance  being  weake. 
For  when  flie  firfl  with  feeming  flately  grace 
Beflowd  on  me  a  louing  fweete  regard. 
The  beames,  which  then  proceeded  from  her  face 
Were  fuch,  as  for  the  fame  I  found  no  warde, 
But  needes  perforce  I  mufl  become  content 
To  mealt  in  minde  till  all  my  wittes  were  fpent. 
And  therewithall  Cupido  plaid  his  part. 
He  fhotte  a  fhaft  throughout  her  chriflall  eyes, 
Wherewith  he  cleft  in  twaine  my  yeelding  heart : 
And  this  is  caufe  my  panting  heart  flill  cries, 

I  breake,  I  mealt,  helpe  heau'ns  in  my  behoue. 
No  herbe  doth  growe  whofe  vertue  cureth  loue. 


XXV.  6i 


It  is  to  be  confHlercd  in  reading  this  Pafsion,  howe  in  fome 
anfweres,  the  accent  or  poynting  of  the  wordes  is  altered,  and 
therewithal!  howe  the  Authour  walking  in  the  woods,  and  be- 
wayling  his  inward  pafsion  oi  Lone,  is  contraried  by  the  replies 
of  Echo :  whofe  meaning  yet  is  not  fo  much  to  gainfay  him, 
as  to  exprelTe  her  own  miferable  ellate  in  daily  confuming 
away  for  theloueof  her  beloued  Xarcifftis',  whose  vnkindnes  Otiid 
defcribeth  at  largo,  together  with  the  extreme  loue  of  Echo^ 


^utI)or.  \T/N  all  this  world  I  thinke  none  lou's  but  I. 
6clio.      S^None  lou's  but  I.      Jlutlj.   Thou   foolifh 
tattling  ghefl, 

In  this  thou  telfl  a  lie.      (!5cl)0.  thou  telfl  a  lie. 
^tttl)or.  Why?  Lone  him  felfe  he  lodgeth  in  my  brefl. 
f^z\)Q.  He  lodgeth  in  my  brefl.     ^utli.  I  pine  forgriefe; 

And  yet  I  want  reliefe.     (f^cl^O.  I  want  reliefe. 
^titl30r.  No  flarre  more  faire  then  flie  whom  I  adore. 
(i;cl)0.  Then ^he,  whom  I  adore.  ^utI).HerehenceIburne 

Stil  more  and  more.  (!3cl)0. 1  burne  flil  more  and  more, 
%yi\\\^x.Loue^  letmyheartretume.  (!5cl)0.  myheart,  retume. 
^utl).  Is  then  the  Saint^  for  whom  thou  makefl  mone, 

And  whom  I  loue,  but  one?    (!?cl)0.  I  loue  but  one. 
^utl)or.  O  heau'ns,  is  there  in  loue  no  ende  of  ills  ? 
(!5£l}0.  Inlouenoendeofills.  J^utl).  Thoupratlingvoyce. 

Dwelfl  thou  in  th'  ayre,  or  but  in  hollow  hills? 
(J5cl)0.  In  hollow  hills,  ^utl).  Ceafeoftovauntthychoyfe. 
(0cl)O.  Ceafeoftovauntthychoyfe.  3^tttl).  Iwouldreplie, 

But  here  for  loue  I  die.    (!5cl)0.  for  loue  I  die. 

1  Lib.  3.  Metamorph.  2  S.  Liquescens  immutat  senstun. 


62  XXVI. 


Here  the  Author  as  a  man  ouertaken  with  fome  deepe  melan- 
cholic, compareth  him  felfe  vnto  the  Nightingale,  and  con- 
ferreth  his  vnhappie  eftate  (for  that  by  no  meanes  his  Mijlr-ejfe 
will  pitie  him)  with  her  nightly  complaints  :  to  whofe  har- 
monic all  thofe  that  giue  attentiue  eare,  they  ronceiue  more 
delight  in  the  muficall  varietie  of  her  noates,  tiien  they  take 
iuft  compafsion  vpon  her  diftreffed  heauines. 


^xi/Hen  Maye  is  m  his  prime,  and  youtnfull  fpnng 

^jmV  Doth  cloath  the  tree  with  leaues,  and  ground  with 

And  timeof  yere  reuiueth  eu'ry  thing;  [flowres, 

And  louely  Nature  fmiles,  and  nothing  lowres  : 

Then  Philomela  mofl  doth  flraine  her  brefl 

With  night-complaints,  and  fits  in  litle  refl. 

This  Birds  eflate  I  may  compare  with  mine. 

To  whom  fond  loue  doth  worke  fuch  wrongs  by  day, 

That  in  the  night  my  heart  mufl  needes  repine. 

And  florme  with  fighes  to  eafe  me  as  I  may ; 

Wliilfl  others  are  becalm'd,  or  lye  them  flill, 

Or  fayle  fecure  with  tide  and  winde  at  will. 

And  as  all  thofe,  which  heare  this  Bird  complaine, 

Conceiue  in  all  her  tunes  a  fweete  delight, 

Without  remorfe,  or  pitying  her  payne :    ^  fl 

So  fhe,  for  whom  I  wayle  both  day  and  night,  -  j 

Doth  fport  her  felfe  in  hearing  my  complaint ; 

A  iufl  reward  for  feruing  fuch  a  Saint. 


XXVII.  6;^ 


In  the  firfl  fixe  verfes  of  this  Pafsion,  the  Author  hath  imitated 
perfeclly  fixe  verfes  in  an  0</<r  of  Ronfard^  which  beginncih 
thus : 

Cehii  qui  tt'avme  eft  vialhmreux^  En  son  2.  liure 

Et  malJu'un'ux  e'l  famoureux,  ^"  Bocage. 

Mais  la  ffii/ire,  etc.  ? 
And  in  the  lad  flaffe  of  this  Pafsion  alfo  he  commeth  very  neere 
to  the  fenfe,  which  Ronfard  vfeth  in  an  other  place,  where  he 
w  riteth  to  his  Millrclfe  in  this  manor : 
En  z'ens  tn  baifer  Pint  on 

La  das,  a/res  e/ie  Canw  E„  se3  mcs'.an- 

T^aura  nti/e  en  fa  naceff'e?  ges. 


^Nhappy  is  the  ^vight,  thats  voide  of  Loue^ 
yk  And  yet  \'nhappie  he,  whom  Lone  torments, 
But  greatefl  griefe  that  man  is  for'ct  to  prone, 
Whofe  haiightie  Loue  not  for  his  loue  relents, 
But  hoyfmg  vp  her  fayle  of  prowd  difdaine, 
For  feruice  done  makes  no  retume  of  gaine. 
By  this  all  you,  which  knowe  my  tickle  flate, 
May  giue  deferued  blame  to  whome  I  feme, 
And  fay,  that  Loue  hath  miferie  to  mate, 
Since  labour  breedes  but  loffe,  and  letts  me  flerue : 
For  I  am  he  which  Hues  a  lafling  thrall 
To  her,  whofe  heart  affords  no  grace  at  all. 
She  hopes  (perchance)  to  Hue  and  flourifh  flill, 
Or  els,  when  C/iaro?is  boate  hath  felt  her  peaze, 
By  louing  lookes  to  conquer  Plutoes  will ; 
But  all  in  vaine :  t'is  not  Proferpiii^s  eafe  : 
She  neuer  -will  permit,  that  any  one 
Shall  ioy  his  Loue,  but  (he  her  felfe  alone. 

1  ////  irm  Trrsiis  n  Rottsardo  (fesm'buntur  ex  Anacreottie  Crceco. 


64  XXVIII. 

In  this  Pafsion  the  Authour  doth  very  bufiHe  imitate  and  aug- 
ment a  certaine  Ode  of  Ronfard,  which  hee  writeth  vnto  his 
Miftres ;  he  beginneth,  as  followeth, 
Plufieurs  de  leurs  cors  denues 
Sefont  veuz  en  diuer/e  terre 

Miraculeufement  mues,  Au  luire  des  les 

L'vn  en  Serpent,  et  t autre  en  Pierre^  meslanges. 

Vvn  en  Fleur,  t autre  en  Arbrijfeau 
L'vn  en  Loup  etc.  ? 


~  ~  Any  haue  liu'd  in  countreys  farre  and  ny, 


Wi  Whofe  heartes  by  Loue  once  quite  confum'd  away, 
Strangely  their  fhapes  were  changed  by  and  by, 
One  to  a  Floui'r,  an  other  to  a  Bay,  [mone, 

One  to   a  Streamej  whofe  courfe  yet  maketh 
One  to  a  Doue,  an  other  to  a  Sio?ie. 
But  harke  my  Deere;  if  wifhing  could  preuaile, 
I  would  become  a  Chrijlall  Mirrour  I, 
Wherein  thou  might'fl  behold  what  thing  I  aile  : 
Or  els  I  would  be  chang'd  into  a  Flie, 

To  tafl  thy  cuppe,  and  being  dayly  ghefl 
At  bord  and  bedde,  to  kiffe  thee  mid'fl  thy  red ; 
Or  I  would  be  Perfume  for  thee  to  burne, 
That  with  my  loffe  I  might  but  pleafe  thy  fmell; 
Or  be  fome  facred  Spring,  to  ferue  thy  turne, 
By  bathing  that,  wherein  my  heart  doth  dwell; 
But  woe  is  me,  my  wifhing  is  but  vaine. 
Since  fate  bidds  Loue  to  work  my  endleffe  paine. 


XXIX.  6k 


The  Authour  in  this  Sonnet  in  a  large  maner  fetteth  forth  the 
furpasfinge  worthines  of  his  Ladu\  reporting  her  beawtie  and 
forme  to  be  fo  fingiilcr,  that  neither  Appdlcs  can  perfecflly 
drawe  her  portraicte  ;  nor  Praxitc'es  trewly  frame  her  image 
and  likenes  in  any  kinde  of  metall.  And  the  Hke  vnablenes 
he  awardeth  vnto  Virgil  and  Homer  the  two  Paragons  of 
Foc-tryt',  if  tliey  Hiould  but  once  endcuour  to  praife  her.  And 
the  like  infulTiciencie  he  fayeth  would  be  found  in  7>////Vhim  felfe, 
if  he  fhould  endeuour  to  commend  her.  And  then  finally  he 
excufeth  his  owne  bould  hardines  (hewed  in  prayfing  her, 
vpon  the  forcible  extremitie,  which  he  abideth  in  Louc,  and  the 
eamefl  defire,  which  he  hath  to  pleafe. 


^O'  Vch  is  the  Saint,  whom  I  on  earth  adore, 
I  As  neuer  age  fhall  know  when  this  is  pafl, 
Nor  euer  yet  hath  like  byn  feene  before  : 
Apelles  yf  he  Uu'd  would  fland  agaR 
^  With  coulours  to  fet  downe  her  comely  fare, 
Who  farre  excells  though  Ve?ius  were  in  place. 
Praxiteles  might  likewife  fland  in  doute 
In  metall  to  expreffe  her  forme  arighte, 
Whofe  praife  for  fhape  is  blowne  the  world  throughout: 
Nor  Virgin  could  fo  good  a  verfe  indite 

As  onely  would  fufhfe  to  tell  her  name ; 
Nor  Hojuer  with  his  Miife  exprefle  her  fame  ; 
TuUy,  whofe  fpeach  was  boulde  in  eu'ry  caufe, 
Yf  he  were  here  to  praife  the  Saint  I  ferue, 
The  number  of  her  giftes  would  make  him  paufe, 
And  feare  to  fpeake  how  well  fhe  doth  deferue. 
Why  then  am  I  thus  bould  that  haue  no  skill  ? 
Enforfl  by  Lone  I  fhew  my  zealous  will. 

1  Here    he   a'udeth    vnto   the  pour-         Si      Venerem     Cous     nunquam 
iraict  of  Vemis  which  Apelles  drew  :     pinxisset  Appelles. 
as  Omd  doth   lib.    3.   de  art.   ainan. 


66  XXX. 


In  the  firfl  part  of  this  Pafsion  the  Author  prooueth,  that  hee 
abideth  more  vnreft  and  hurt  for  his  beloued,  then  euer  did 
Lceander  for  his  Hero  :  of  which  two  paramours  the  mutuall 
feruency  in  Loue  is  moft  excellently  fet  foorth  by  AInfccus  the 
Greeke  Poet.  In  the  fecond  part  he  compareth  himfelfe  with 
Pyramus,  and  Hoemon  king  Creons  Sonne  of  Thebes,  which 
were  both  fo  true  hearted  louers,  that  through  Loue  they 
fuffered  vntimely  death,  as  Ouid  nietam.  lib.  4.  writeth  at  large 
of  the  one,  And  the  Greeke  Tragedian  Sophocles  in  Antig.  of 
the  other.  In  the  lafl,  in  making  comparifon  of  his  paynes  in 
Loue  to  the  paines  of  Orpheus  defcendinge  to  hell  for  his 
Eurydice,  he  alludeth  to  thofe  two  verfes  in  Strozza, 

Tartara,  Cymba,  Charon,  Pluto,  rota,  Cerberus,  angues, 

Cocytes,  Phlegeton^  Stix,  lapis,  vrna,/itis. 


^Hat  though  Lea?ider  fvvamme  in  darkfome  night, 


w 


Mv!^  Through  troubled  Helespont  for  Heroes  fake ; 

And  loft  his  hfe  by  loffe  of  Sejliis  Hght  ? 

The  hke  or  more  my  felfe  do  vndertake, 

When  eu'ry  howre  along  the  lingring  yeare, 
My  ioye  is  drownde,  and  hope  blowne  out  with 
And  what  though  Fyram  fpent  his  vitall  breath    [feare. 
For  Thisbes  fake  ?  or  Hoemon  choafe  to  die 
To  follow  his  Antigone  by  death  ? 
In  harder  cafe  and  worfer  plight  am  I, 

Which  loue  as  they,  but  liue  in  dying  flill, 
And  faine  would  die,  but  can  not  haue  my  will. 
We  reade  that  Orpheus  with  his  Harpe  of  golde, 
For  his  Eiiridice  went  downe  to  hell  : 
The  toyle  is  more,  by  that  time  all  be  tolde. 
Which  I  endure  for  her,  whofe  heart  is  fell ; 

The  Stigian  Curre,  the  Wheele,  the  Stone,  the  //>'<?. 
And  Fm-ies  all  are  plac't  in  my  defire. 


XXXI.  67 


There  needeth  no  annotation  at  all  before  this  Pafsion,  it  is  of  it 
felfe  fo  plaine,  and  eafily  conuayed.  Yet  the  vnleamed  may 
haue  this  helpe  geuen  them  by  the  way  to  know  what  Galaxia 
is,  or  Paclolus,  which  perchaunce  they  haue  not  read  off  often 
in  our  \iilgar  Rimes.  Galaxia  (to  omit  both  the  Etimologie 
and  what  the  Philofophers  doe  write  thereof)  is  a  white  way  or 
milky  Circle  in  the  heauens,  which  Ouid  mentioneth  in  this 
manner. 

EJl  via  fuhlimis  calo  manifejla  fercJio^  Metamorph. 

Laclca  nomen  habct,  candore  Jiotabilis  ipfo.  ^' 

And  Cicero  thus  in  fonniio  Scipioiiis ;  Erat  autcm  is  fplendidijjiino 
candore  inter  fia  mm  as  circulus  elucens,  quern  zvs  {vi  a  Graijs 
accepijlis)  orbeni  laifleiim  jinncjipatis. 

Pcufioltis  is  a  riuer  in  Lidia,  which,hath  golden  fandes  \Tider  it,  as 
Tibullus  witneffeth  in  this  verfe, 

Nee  me  repia  iuuant,  nee  Lydius  anrifer  amnis.     Tibul.  lib.  3. 


•7  Ho  can  recount  the  vertues  of  my  deare, 
^y^Y  Or  fay  how  farre  her  fame  hath  taken  flight, 
That  can  not  tell  how  many  flarres  appeare 
In  part  of  heau'n,  which  Galaxia  hight, 

Or  number  all  the  moates  in  Phebtis  rayes, 
Or  golden  fandes,  whereon  PaBohis  piayes  ? 
And  yet  my  hurts  enforce  me  to  confeffe, 
In  cryflall  breafl  fhe  fhrowdes  a  bloudy  hart, 
Which  hart  in  time  will  make  her  merits  lefTe, 
Vnleffe  betimes  flie  cure  my  deadly  fmart : 
For  nowe  my  life  is  double  dying  ftill, 
And  fhe  defam'de  by  fuffrance  of  fuch  ill ; 
And  till  the  time  flie  helpes  me  as  fhe  may, 
Let  no  man  vndertake  to  tell  my  toyle. 
But  onely  fuche,  as  can  diflinctly  fay, 
What  Monflers  Nilus  breedes,  or  Affricke  foyle  : 
For  if  he  doe,  his  labour  is  but  lofl, 
Whilfl  I  both  frie  and  freeze  twixt  flame  and  frofl. 


68  XXXII. 


Here  the  Autliour  by  fayning  a  troublefome  dreame,  expreffeth  a 
full  Pafsion  of  Loue.  And  how  foeuer  fome  wil  confter  of  this 
kinde  of  inuention,  it  is  euident,  that  the  like  hath  bin  vfuall 
amongft  thofe  that  haue  excelled  in  the  fweetefl  vaine  of 
Poetrie.  And  (to  let  the  reft  goe,)  it  may  pleafe  him  that  is 
curious  to  finde  fome  prefident  hereof,  to  vifite  but  the  works 
of  Hercules  Strozza,^  who  in  his  Somnium  hath  written  fo 
exquifitely,  that  the  Dreame  will  quite  his  trauaile,  that  fhall 
perufe  it  with  due  attention. 


1^  N   Thetis  lappe,  while  Titan  tooke  his  refl, 
I  flumbring  lay  within  my  reflleffe  bedde, 
Till  Morpheus  vf  d  a  falfed  foary  ieft, 
Prefenting  her,  by  whom  I  ftill  am  ledde  : 

For  then  I  thought  Ihe  came  to  ende  my  wo, 
But  when  I  wakt  (alas)  t'was  nothing  fo. 
Embracing  ayre  in  fleed  of  my  delight, 
I  blamed  Loue  as  authour  of  the  guile, 
Who  with  a  fecond  fleepe  clozd  vp  my  fight, 
And  faid  (me  thought)  that  I  mufl  bide  a  while 
Ixions  paines,  whofe  armes  did  oft  embrace 
Falfe  darkned  clouds,  in  fleed  of  lunoes  grace. 
When  I  had  laine  and  llumbred  thus  a  while, 
Rewing  the  dolefull  doome  that  Loue  affign'd, 
A  woman  Saint,  which  bare  an  Angels  face, 
Bad  me  awake  and  eafe  my  troubled  minde  : 
With  that  I  wakt,  forgetting  what  was  pafl, 
And  fawe  t'was  Hope^  which  helped  thus  at  lafl. 

1  Erotlcon.  lib.  2. 


XXXIII.  69 

In  this  Sonnet  the  Authour  is  of  opinion,  that  his  Miftrcs  (by  the 
fatall  appojTitement  of  deflinie)  was  from  the  beginning  re- 
fei'uecl  to  Hue  in  thefe  times,  and  to  bee  the  onely  gouernefle 
and  fubiect  of  his  thoughtes  :  whereas  :  if  either  flie  had  bene 
borne,  when  Paris  was  to  giue  fentence  vpon  Ida  for  beflovving 
the  Golden  Apple  ;  fhe  had  (as  he  fuppofeth)  bene  preferred 
before  In  no,  Pallas  and  Venus,  and  moreouer  fupplied  that 
place  in  the  loue  of  kinge  Pna///s  [onne,  whiche  Helen  of  Gi-eece 
obteined  :  or  if  fliee  had  then  lined  when  Bacchus  tooke 
Ariadne  to  wife,  (he  had  bene  conuayed  in  her  fleede,  vnto 
that  place  in  heau'n,  where  nowe  the  Crowne  of  Ariadne 
called  '^Corona  Gnojia  doth  (hine  continuallie,  beinge  beautified 
with  greate  varietie  of  lightfome  flarres. 


i^'T/Hen  Priams  fonne  in  midfl  oti  Ida  plaine 
(,Vir|  Gaue  one  the  price,  and  other  two  the  foile, 
If  fhe  for  whom  I  dill  abide  in  paine 
Had  liued  then  within  the  Troyan  foile, 

No  doubt  but  hers  had  bene  the  golden  ball, 
Helen  had  fcaped  rape,  and  Troy  his  fall. 
Or  if  my  Dame  had  then  enioyed  life 
^\'hen  Bacchus  fought  iox  Ariadnaes  loue, 
No  doubt  but  fhe  had  onely  bene  his  wife, 
And  flowne  from  hence  to  fit  with  Gods  aboue : 
For  fhe  exceedes  his  choife  of  Create  fo  farre 
As  Phebus  doth  excell  a  twinckeling  flarre. 
But  from  the  firfl  all  fates  hauc  thus  affign'd, 
That  fhe  fliould  Hue  in  thefe  our  latter  dayes, 
I  thinke  to  beare  a  fway  within  my  minde 
And  feede  my  thoughtes  with  frendly  fweete  delayes ; 
If  fo  it  be,  let  me  attend  my  chaunce. 
And  fortune  pipe  when  I  beginne  to  daunce. " 

I  Cuius  ortum  et  occasum  memorat        2  Assai   ben    balla  a  chi   Fortuna 
Plinius  nat  hist  lib.  i8.  c  28.  et.  c.  31.     suona. 


70 


XXXIIII, 


The  Author  in  this  Sonnet  very  highly  commendeth  the  mod 
rare  excellencies  of  his  miftres,  auouching  her  to  haue  no  equall. 
And  he  imitateth  the  fecond  Sonnet,  Nelle  ri7ne  di  me/fer  Agnolo 
Fiorenzuola  the  Florentine,  whofe  beginning  is  all  one  with 
that  heere  ;  and  this  it  is  : 

Deh  le  inie  belle  donne  et  amor  of e, 

Ditemi  il  ver  per  vojlra  cortejla, 

Non  I  chiara  tra  voi  la  donna  mia, 

Come  <?V  Sol  chiar  tra  tutte  Valti'e  cofe  ? 


'E  {lately  Dajjtes,  whofe  beauties  farre  excell, 
Of  courtefie  confeffe  at  my  requeft, 
Doth  not  my  Loue  amongft  you  beare  the  bell, 
As  Phebiis  goulden  rayes  obfcures  the  refl 
Of  Planet  Starves^  and  dimmeth  eu'ry  light 
That  fhines  in  heau'n  or  earth  by  day  or  night  ? 
Take  wiflly  heed  in  vewing  her  fweete  face, 
Where  nature  hath  exprefl  what  ere  fhe  could 
Eather  for  bewties  blaze  or  comely  grace : 
Since  when  to  prize  her  worke  fhe  breake  the  moulde, 
So  that  who  feekes  to  finde  her  Equall  out, 
Intends  a  thing  will  nere  be  brought  about. 
Therefore  fweete  Ladies  all  voutchfafe  with  me 
To  folow  her  defert,  and  my  defire, 
By  prayfmg  her  vnto  the  ninth  degree, 
,,    For  honour  by  due  right  is  vertues  hire. 

And  E?mies  mouth  muft  faye  when  all  is  donne, 
No  Bird  but  one  is  facred  to  the  funne. 


XXXV. 


In  this  Pafsion  the  Authour,  as  being  blinded  with  Loue,  firfl 
compareth  himfelfe  with  Tircfias  the  old  Soothfayer  of  Thebes, 
whome  Jiino  depriued  of  fight  ;  but  Joue  rewarded  him  with 
the  fpirit  of  prophecy.  Then  he  aUudeth  vnto  Aclccon :  And 
laflly  he  flieweth  why  he  is  in  worfe  cafe,  then  thofe,  which  by 
vewing  Mcdufaes  heade  were  turned  into  floanes,  leefing  both 
life  and  light  at  once  ;  and  fo  concludcth,  that  olde  accurfed 
Oedipus  of  all  other  befl  bcfittelh  him  for  a  companion. 


iAf\T;7Hen  firfl  mine  eyes  were  blinded  with  Deftre, 
^/T\V  They  had  newe  feene  a  Secofid  Sufuje  whofe  face 
Though  cleere  as  beaten  fnowe,  yet  kindled  fire 
Within  my  brefl,  and  moulte  my  heart  apafe  : 
Thus  learned  I  by  proofe,  what  others  write, 
That  Sunne,  and^re,  and //wwe  offend  the 
O  ten  times  happie  bHnded  Theban  wight,  [fight. 

Whofe  loffe  of  fight  did  make  him  halfe  diuine. 
Where  I  (alas)  haue  lofl  both  life  and  light. 
Like  him,  whofe  homes  did  plague  his  heedles  eyen ; 
And  yet  was  he  in  better  cafe  then  I, 
WTiich  neither  Hue,  nor  can  obtaine  to  dye. 
All  Perfcus  foes  that  fawe  Medufaes  heade. 
By  leefing  fliape  and  fenfe  were  quitte  from  thrall ; 
But  I  feele  paines,  though  blinde  and  double  deade, 
And  was  my  felfe  efficient  caufe  of  all  : 

Wherefore,  of  all  that  ere  did  ceafe  to  fee 
^  Old  Oedipus  were  meetefl  mate  for  me. 

^  Vide  SopJiocl.  aut  Setiecam  hi  trn^rdijs  suis  dc  Oedipi  iniscrijs. 


72  XXXVI. 


Here  the  Author  mifliketh  of  his  wearifome  eftate  in  loue,  for 
that  he  neither  obtaineth  any  fauour  at  the  handes  of  his  Mif- 
tres  for  his  good  thought  or  fpeach,  nor  by  his  louinge  lookes, 
or  prefents,  nor  by  his  humilitie  in  writing,  or  long  fufiferance 
in  feruitude.  And  herehence  he  blameth  her  ouerhardnes  of 
heart,  and  the  froward  conftellation  of  his  owne  natiuitie  :  and 
therewithal!  abandoning  all  further  defire  of  life,  hath  in  re- 
quefl  vntimely  death,  as  the  only  end  of  his  infelicitie. 


vCFf  Ach  thought  I  thinke  is  frend  to  her  I  Loue; 


i^j-j)!  ftill  in  fpeach  vfe  courfe  of  gentle  wordes; 

My  louing  lookes  are  fuch  as  ought  to  moue ; 

My  giftes  as  greate  as  mine  eftate  affordes ; 

My  letters  tell  in  what  a  cafe  I  fland,       [hand; 
Though  full  of  blots  through  fault  of  trembling 
I  dewly  daunce  attendance  as  I  may, 
With  hope  to  pleafe,  and  feare  to  make  offence  ; 
All  fou'raintie  to  her  I  graunt  for  aye  ; 
And  where  fhe  hurtes  yet  make  I  no  defence  ; 

Sobbes  are  the  fonge,  wherein  I  take  delight ; 

And  fhew'rs  of  teares  do  dayly  dimme  my  fight. 
And  yet  all  this  doth  make  but  fmall  auaile, 
Her  heart  is  hard,  and  neuer  will  relent, 
No  time,  no  place,  no  prayer  can  preuaile, 
The  heau'ns  them  felues  diffauour  mine  intent : 

Why  fhould  I  then  defire  a  longer  life. 

To  weaue  therein  a  webbe  of  endleffe  flrife  ? 


XXXVII.  73 


The  Author  in  this  pafsion  doth  by  manner  of  fecret  comparifon 
preferre  his  beloued  before  all  other  women  whatfoeuer :  and 
perfuadeth  vpon  the  examples  of  all  fortes  of  Goddes  (whom 
loue  hath  ouertaken  at  one  time  or  other)  that  the  worthines  of 
his  Millres  being  well  confif'  ed,  his  owne  fondnes  in  loue 
mufl  of  force  be  in  it  felfe  exculable. 


\^>  F  /o!/e  himfelfe  be  fubiect  vnto  Zot^e 
rf^And  ransre  the  woodes  to  finde  a  mortal!  nraie: 
If  Neptune  from  the  feas  himfelfe  remoue, 
And  feeke  on  fandes  with  earthly  wightes  to  plaie: 
Then  may  I  loue  my  peereleffe  choife  by  right, 
Who  farre  excels  each  other  mortall  wight. 
If  Fluto  could  by  loue  be  drawne  from  hell, 
To  yeeld  him  felfe  a  filly  Virgins  thrall: 
If  Fhcbus  could  voutfafe  on  earth  to  dwell, 
To  winne  a  ruflike  maide  vnto  his  call: 

Then,  how  much  more  fliould  I  adore  the  fight 
Of  her,  in  whom  the  heau'ns  themfelues  delight? 
If  cuntrie  Pan  might  folowe  Nymphes  in  chafe. 
And  yet  through  loue  remaine  deuoyd  of  blame : 
If  Satirs  were  excufd  for  feeking  grace 
To  ioy  the  fruites  of  any  mortall  Da?ne'. 

Then,  why  fhould  I  once  doubt  to  loue  her  flill. 
On  whom  ne  Goddes  nor  men  can  gaze  theire  fill? 


74  XXXVIII. 

In  the  firfl  ftaffe  of  this  Pafsion  the  Authour  expreffeth  howe 
fondly  his  friendes  ouertrouble  him,  by  queftioninge  with  him 
touching  his  loue,  or  accidents  thereof,    in  the  two  lafl  verles 
of  the  fecond  flaffe  he  imitateth  thofe  verfes  of  Sophocles : 
"Epwrt  fih  vvv  6sTis  dvraviaraTaL 
UvKTTjs  oTTics,  is  xfTpas,  ov  KaXuis  (ppoveT. 
OSros  yap  apxei  Kal  deCov,  ottcvs  diXu-  In  Trachinijs 

which  may  be  thus  Enghfhed, 

That  man,  which  champion  like  willjlriue  ivith  Loue 
And  comhate  hand  to  hand,  hath  little  zvitte: 
For  as  he  lijl  he  rules  the  Gods  aboue. 

And  in  the  lafl,  he  fetteth  downe  his  mind  fully  bent  to  per- 
fift  conftantly  in  the  loue  and  feruice  of  his  Ladie :  like  to  that, 
which  Stephanus  Forcatulus  (an  excellent  Ciuilian,  and  one  of 
the  befb  Poetes  of  Fraunce  for  thefe  many  yeares)  wrote  vnto  his 
beloued  Clytia : 

Quin  no(flu  pluuium  cititis  mirabimtir  arcum, 
Solque  domo  Hefperidum  mane propi7iquus  erit, 

Qudfu  capiat  Icpidce  me  fceda  ohliuio  nyjnphce,  etc.  ? 


^^lOme  afke  me,  when,  and  how  my  loue  begunne; 
/O'Sorae,  where  it  Ues,  and  what  effectes  it  hath ; 
ol2/Some,  who  flie  is,  by  whome  I  am  vndone; 
Some,  what  I  meane  to  treade  fo  lewde  a  path; 
I  anfwere  all  alike,  by  anfw'ring  nought, 
But,  ble'Jl  is  he^  who77ie  Cupid  neiier  caught : 
And  yet  I  coulde,  if  forrowe  woulde  permit. 
Tell  when  and  howe  I  fix't  my  fancie  firft, 
And  for  whofe  fake  I  loft  both  will  and  wit, 
And  choafe  the  path,  wherein  I  Hue  accurfl: 

But  fuch  like  deedes  would  breed  a  double  foare, 
„       For  loue  gainefaide  growes  madder  then  before. 
But  note  herewith,  that  fo  my  thoughts  are  bound 
To  her  in  whome  my  libertie  lies  thrall, 
That  if  fhe  would  voutchfafe  to  falue  my  wound, 
Yet  force  of  this  my  loue  fliould  neuer  fall, 

Till  Phcebus  vfe  to  rife  from  out  the  Weji., 
And  towardes  night  feeke  lodging  in  the  Eajl. 


XXXIX.  75 


The  fecond  part  of  this  Pafsion  is  borrowed  from  out  the  fifte 
Sonnet  in  Fetrarch  part  i.  whofe  words  are  thefe, 

Piu  volte  gia  per  dir  le  labbra  aperfi: 
Poi  ritnafe  la  voce  in  mezz^l petto : 
A/a  qual  fuon  poria  mai/alir  taut' alto  ? 

Piu  volte  incoviinciai  difcriitcr  verfi. 
Ma  la  penna,  e  la  mano,  e  lo'ntelletto 

Rimafer  vinto  nel  primier  ajfalto. 


i^f-TTHen  firfl  thefe  eyes  beheld  with  great  delight 
jTv^  The  Fhccnix  of  this  world,  or  fecond  Stinne, 
Her  beames  or  plumes  bewitched  all  my  fight, 
And  loue  encreafl  the  hurte  that  was  begunne : 
Since  when  my  griefe  is  grow'ne  fo  much  the  more, 
Becaufe  I  finde  no  way  to  cure  the  foare, 
I  haue  attempted  oft  to  make  complainte, 
And  ^\^th  fome  dolefull  wordes  to  tell  my  griefe, 
But  through  my  fearefull  heart  my  voyce  doth  fainte, 
And  makes  me  mute  where  I  fhoulde  craue  releife: 
An  other  while  I  thinke  to  wTite  my  paine, 
But  flreight  my  hand  laies  downe  the  pen  againe. 
Sometimes  my  mind  with  heapes  of  doubtefull  cares 
Conioyn'd  with  fawning  hoapes  is  fore  opprefl, 
And  fometime  fuddeine  ioy  at  vnawares 
Doth  moue  to  much,  and  fo  doth  hurte  my  brefl; 

What  man  doth  Hue  in  more  extreemes  then  thefe, 
\Vhere  death  doth  feeme  a  life,  and  paincs  doe 
pi  cafe  ? 


76  XL. 


The  fenfe  contained  in  this  Sonnet  will  feeme  flraunge  to  fuch  as 
neuer  haue  acquainted  themfelues  with  Loue  and  his  Lawes,  be- 
caufe  of  the  contrarieties  mentioned  therein.  But  to  fuch,  as 
Loue  at  any  time  hath  had  vnder  his  banner,  all  and  euery 
part  of  it  will  appeare  to  be  a  familier  trueth.  It  is  almoft 
word  for  word  taken  out  of  Petrarch,  (where  hee  beginneth, 

Pace  non  truouo,  e  non  ho  da  far  guerra  ;        Parte  prima 
E  temo,  e/pero,  etc.  ?)  Sonet  105. 

All,  except  three  verfes,  which  this  Authour  hath  neceffarily 
added,  for  perfe(5ling  the  number,  which  hee  hath  determined 
to  vfe  in  euery  one  of  thefe  his  Pafsions. 


loy  not  peace,  where  yet  no  warre  is  found ; 

I  feare,  and  hope;  I  bume,  yet  freeze  withall; 

I  mount  to  heau'n,  yet  lie  but  on  the  ground; 

I  compaffe  nought,  and  yet  I  compaffe  all; 
I  liue  her  bond,  which  neither  is  my  foe, 
Nor  frend;  nor  holdes  me  faft,  nor  lets  me  goe; 
Loue  v;ill  not  that  I  liue,  nor  lets  me  die ; 
Nor  lockes  me  faft,  nor  fuffers  me  to  fcape ; 
I  want  both  eyes  and  tongue,  yet  fee  and  cry ; 
I  wifh  for  death,  yet  after  helpe  I  gape; 

I  hate  my  felfe,  but  loue  an  other  wight; 

And  feede  on  greefe,  in  lieu  of  fweete  delight; 
At  felfe  fame  time  I  both  lament  and  ioy; 
I  flill  am  pleafd,  and  yet  difpleafed  flill; 
Loue  fometimes  feemes  a  God,  fometimes  a  Boy; 
Sometimes  I  fmcke,  fometimes  I  fwimme  at  will; 

Twixt  death  and  life,  fmall  difference  I  make ; 

All  this  deere  Dame  befals  me  for  thy  fake. 


XLI.  77 


This  Pafsion  is  framed  \'pon  a  fomewhat  tedious  or  too  much 
affedled  continuation  of  that  figure  in  Rhethorique,  whiche  of 
the  Grekes  is  called  traXiXoyia  or  dvaSiTrXuais,  of  the  Latines 
Kediiphcatio :  whereof  Siifcnbrotus  (if  I  well  remember  me) 
alleadgeth  this  example  out  of  Virgilly 

Scquitiir ptlcherrimus  AiiJluVy  iEneid.  la 

Aujltir  eqjiofidcns. 


Happy  men  that  finde  no  lacke  m  Loiie-y 


I  Lotie^  and  lacke  what  mofl.  I  do  defire; 
My  deepe  defire  no  reafon  can  remoue; 
All  reafon  fliunnes  mybrefl,  that's  fet  one  fire; 
And  fo  the  fire  mainetaines  both  force  and  flame, 
That  force  auayleth  not  againfl  the  fame; 
One  onely  helpe,  can  flake  this  burning  heate, 
Which  burning  heate  proceedeth  from  her  face, 
WTiofe  face  by  lookes  bewitched  my  conceite, 
Through  which  conceite  I  Hue  in  woefull  cafe; 
O  woefull  cafe,  which  hath  no  ende  of  woe, 
Till  woes  haue  ende  by  fauour  of  my  foe ; 
And  yet  my  foe  mainetaineth  fuch  a  Warre, 
As  all  her  Warre  is  nothing  els  but  Peace; 
But  fuch  a  Peace,  as  breedeth  fecreat  larre. 
Which  larre  no  witte,  nor  force,  nor  time  can  ceafe; 
Yet  ceafe  defpaire :  for  time  by  witte,  or  force, 
May  force  my  frendly  foe  to  take  remorfe. 


78  XL  I  I. 


In  this  Pafsion  the  Authour  vnder  colour  of  telling  his  dreame 
doth  very  cunningly  and  liuely  praife  his  Miftres,  fo  farre  forth, 
as  not  onely  to  prefer  her  before  Helen  of  Greece  for  excellencie 
of  beautie,  but  alfo  before  howe  many  foeuer  are  nowe  liuing 
in  this  our  age.  The  dreame  of  it  felfe  is  fo  plainely  and 
effe(51;ually  fet  downe  (albeit  in  fewe  wordes)  that  it  neede  no 
further  annotation  to  explaine  it. 


K|t'  His  latter  night  amidfl  my  troubled  refl 
Vk^  A  Difmall  Dreame  my  fearefull  hart  appald, 
Whereof  the  fomme  was  this :  Loue  made  a  Feafl, 
To  which  ^S\.  Neighbour^  Sai?ites  and  Gods  were  calde : 
The  cheerewas  more  then  mortal!  men  can  thinke, 
And  mirth  grew  on,  by  taking  in  their  drinke. 
Then  lot^e  amidfL  his  cuppes  for  feruice  done 
Gan  thus  to  ieft  with  Ganymede  his  boy; 
I  faine  would  finde  for  thee  my  preaty  Sonne 
A  fayrer  Wife,  then  Paris  brought  to  Troy : 

Why,  fir,  quoth  he,  if  Phebus  fland  my  frend,  [end. 
Who  know's  the  world,  this  geere  will  foone  haue 
Then  loue  replide  that  Phebus  fhould  not  choofe 
But  do  his  befl  to  finde  the  fayrefl  face; 
And  fhe  once  found  fhould  neither  will  nor  choofe 
But  yeelde  her  felfe,  and  chaunge  her  dwelling  place ; 
Alas,  how  much  was  then  my  hart  affright. 
Which  bade  me  wake  and  watch  my  faire  delight  ? 


XLIII.  79 


The  fenfe  or  matter  of  this  Pafsion  is  taken  out  of  Seraphim  in  his 
Stravibotti,  who  wrileth  thus, 

Se  Salamandra  iti  fiamma  vine,  e  infuoco, 

A^on  viejlupifce  quel  chejii  natura^ 
Ma  cojlei  chc  <?  di  giaccio,  e  io  difucco, 

E  in  tnczo  dd  ?>iio  ctwr  viiie  Jiciira  ; 
Chi  la  defcndc  in  cofi  ardcnte  fuoco^ 

Che  douendo  fgiiagliar  diiwnta  dura  ? 
Solo  Amor  di  Xatura  as/ro  aduer/ario, 

Che  d/uo  dif petto  vfti/ce  o^ni  contrario. 


fp  He  Sa/amander  Hues  in  fire  and  flame, 
I-^^  And  yet  but  wonder  fmall  in  Natures  worke : 
By  flraunger  force  iotie  winnes  away  her  fame, 
As  caufmg  colde  in  midfl  of  heat  to  lurke. 

Who  Hfl  of  thefe  my  paines  to  take  the  view, 
Will  foone  confeffe  that  what  I  fay,  is  true. 
For  one  as  colde  as  hardefl  frozen  yfe, 
Is  fixed  fafl,  and  lodgeth  in  my  brefl; 
Whome  reafon  can  remoue  by  no  deuife, 
Nor  any  force  can  caufe  to  let  me  reft : 

And  yet  I  flill  fo  fwimme  in  hoate  defire, 
That  more  I  burne  then  either  flame  or  fire. 
How  flraunge  is  this?  can  contraries  fo  gree. 
That  Ife  in  flame  will  neither  waRe  nor  melt, 
But  flill  encreafe,  and  harder  growe  to  bee, 
Then  erfl  before?  all  this  my  felfe  haue  felt. 

For  Loue  Dame  Natures  foe,  without  remorfe, 
Thus  coopleth  contraries  in  me  by  force. 


8o  ^  XLIIII. 


In  this  Pafsion  the  Authour  mifliketh  one  while  his  eflate,  and 
by  and  by  after  liketh  of  the  fame  againe,  vppon  hoape  and 
likelyhoode  of  amendment,  and  throughout  the  whole  Sonnet 
hee  fayneth  his  Miftres  to  bee  a  Second  Siinne:  and  by  ex- 
prefsinge  his  priuate  infelicitie,  in  either  alwayes  meltinge 
away  with  Lotce,  or  growinge  ftiffe  throughe  Death  approach- 
inge  neere  him  by  reafon  of  dayly  cares,  hee  maketh  allufion 
vnto  the  diuerfe  effeiles  of  the  Sunne,  whiche  maketh  the  clay 
much  harder,  and  the  wax  fofter,  then  it  was  before. 


ft'  Hat  Second  Sunne,  whofe  beames  haue  dimd  my  fight, 


l-J|^So  fcorched  hath  my  hart  and  fenfes  all, 

That  cloggd  with  cares,  and  voide  of  all  delight, 
I  onely  feeke,  and  fue  to  be  her  thrall; 

Yet  foe  this  heate  increafeth  day  by  day, 
That  more  and  more  it  hafl'neth  my  decay. 
Sometimes  I  melt,  as  if  my  limmes  were  wex, 
Sometimes  grow  fliffe,  as  if  they  were  of  clay; 
Thrife  happy  he  whome  Lotie  doth  neuer  vexe, 
For  any  Secojid  Sunne  doth  mealt  away : 

Nay  curfed  I  blafpheme  the  fay  re  11  Light 
That  euer  yet  was  feene  by  day  or  night. 
Perchaunce  her  parching  heates  will  once  repaire 
My  hart  againe,  and  make  me  all  anew : 
The  Fhenix  fo  reuiues  amids  the  ayre 
By  vertue  of  that  Sunne  which  all  men  view : 
The  vertue  of  my  Sunne  exceedes  the  fkye, 
By  her  I  Ihall  reuiue,  though  firfl  I  die. 


XLV.  8i 


The  Authour  vfeth  in  this  Pafsion  the  like  fenfe  to  that  which 
he  had  in  the  lafl  before  it,  calling  his  Miflres  a  Second  Siaine 
vpon  earth,  wherewith  Ileauen  it  felfe  is  become  in  Lotie:  But 
when  he  compiled  this  Sonnet,  he  thought  not  to  haue  placed 
it  amongft  thefe  his  Englifli  toyes. 


Oelices  alij  iuuenes,  quos  hiandula  Cypris 
y^^\         Apt  OS  fecit  amoribus, 

Exoptare  folent  ienebrofa  crepiifcula  noHis^ 
Aurora;  maledicere : 
At  multo  ejl  mi/ii  char  a  magis  pukherrima  cofiiux 

Tythoni  gelidi  fenis, 
Du7n  venit  i?i  prhna  f  urgenfis  parte  diet, 

Et  Soles  gej?ii?ios  viihi 
Apperit^  et  moejlo  fxlices  reddit  o cellos^ 

Quhd  Soles  videa7n  duos, 
Qui  finiili  forma,  fimilific  luce  corufcant, 

Et  mittimt  radios  pares, 
Vt  Polus  ipfe  nouo  Terrcs  laqueatus  ainore 

Flainmis  itiuideat  meis, 
Soils  et  ignotofe  tor  real  ignefecundi, 

Ohlitus  decor  is  fui, 
Haudfecus  atque  olim,  Cum  ver is  prima  venujlas 

Multo  flore  fuperbijt, 
Et  nitidos  primumflrophijs  ornare  capillos 

Pulchri  Ndiadinn  chori. 


82  XL  VI. 


Here  the  Author  bewaileth  the  extremitie  of  his  eflate  growinge 
dayly  to  be  more  troublefome  then  before,  and  all  through  the 
hard  hart  of  his  beloued  :  whome  he  therefore  aptly  compareth 
vnto  a  flony  rocke,  which  nothinge  can  moue  or  wafle  awaye 
but  longe  continuance  of  time.  And  hereuppon,  after  hauing 
longe  flriued  with  himfelfe  and  his  pafsions,  hee  is  quyetly 
refolued  to  haue  patience,  and  fo  long  to  perfeuer  in  the  flill 
hoping  minde  of  a  trewe  louer,  till  by  long  continuance  of  time 
Loue  be  induced  to  ftande  his  friend. 


HyAYLl  yee  that  loue  compare  your  paines  with  mine, 
C5y^  Which  voyde  of  hoape  continue  flill  her  thrall, 
Whofe  heart  is  hard,  and  neuer  will  affigne 
A  raunfome  day,  nor  once  will  bow  at  all, 

Much  like  the  ftony  rocke,  whofe  hardned  fide 
Will  fcarfely  weare  with  courfe  of  time  or  tide. 
And  yet,  fmce  time  can  weare  each  thinge  away, 
I  will  enforce  my  felfe  to  Hue  content. 
Till  fo  my  thoughtes  haue  fed  vpon  delay. 
That  Reafon  rule  the  roafl  and  loue  relent ; 

0  vaine  attempt  in  ftriuing  with  Difpaire, 

1  build  nought  els  but  caflles  in  the  ayre. 
For  why  :  the  Sunne  may  fooner  fhine  by  night, 
And  twinckling  flarres  giue  glimfmge  fparkes  by  day : 
Then  I  can  ceafe  to  ferue  my  Sweete  delight^ 
Whome  neither  force  nor  time  can  driue  away : 

Therefore  in  hoape  that  loue  will  Hand  my  frend 
I  thus  conclude,  Each  thing  but  loue  hath  end. 


XL  VII.  83 


This  Pafsion  conteineth  a  relation  through  out  from  line  to  line  ; 
as,  from  euery  line  of  the  fail  flatTc  as  it  flandeth  in  order, 
vnto  euery  line  of  the  fecond  ftaffe  :  and  from  the  fecond  (laffe 
vnto  the  third.  The  oftener  it  is  read  of  him  that  is  no  great 
clarke,  the  more  pleafure  he  fliall  haue  in  it.  And  this  pofie  a 
fcholler  fet  down  ouer  this  Sonnet,  when  he  had  well  confi- 
derecl  of  it  :  Tarn  ca/u,  quant  arte  et  ttia'njlria.  The  two  firft 
lines  are  an  imitation  of  Scraphinc,  Sonnctto  103. 

Col  tempo  el  Villanello  al  giogo  mena 
El  Torfifiero,  efi  crudo  animale, 
Col  tempo  el  Falcon  s\'fa  1^  menar  Vale 
E  ritornare  a  te  chiaviatido  h  pena. 


ly  N  time  the  Bull  is  brought  to  weare  the  yoake ; 
In  time  all  haggred  Haukes  will  floope  the  Lures; 
In  time  fmall  wedge  will  cleaue  the  flurdiefl  Oake; 
In  time  the  Marble  weares  with  weakefl  fhe^vres  : 
More  fierce  is  my  fweete  loiie^  more  hard  withall, 
Then  Bead,  or  Birde,  then  Tree,  or  Stony  wall. 
No  yoake  preuailes,  fhee  will  not  yeeld  to  might ; 
No  Lure  will  caufe  her  floope,  fhe  beares  full  gorge  ; 
No  wedge  of  woes  make  printe,  fhe  reakes  no  right; 
No  fhe\we  of  tears  can  moue,  fhe  thinkes  I  forge : 

Helpe  therefore  Z^^^?/;//v  Boy^  come  perce  herbrefl 
With  that  fame  fhaft,  which  robbes  me  of  my  refl. 
So  let  her  feele  thy  force,  that  flie  relent ; 
So  keepe  her  lowe,  that  fhe  vouchfafe  a  pray  ; 
So  frame  her  will  to  right,  that  pride  be  fpent ; 
So  forge,  that  I  may  fpeede  without  delay  ; 

Which  if  thou  do,  I'le  fweare,  and  fmge  with  ioy, 
That  Lone  no  longer  is  a  blinded  Boy. 


84  XLVIII. 


This  Pafsion  conteineth  two  principal  pointes.  In  the  firft  are 
placed  two  fimilitudes  ;  in  both  which  the  Authour  expreffeth 
his  own  wilfulnes  in  loue.  In  the  fecond,  he  compareth  the 
beautifull  eyes  of  his  Mijlreffe  vnto  the  eyes  of  the  Bafdique, 
which  killeth  a  man  with  his  onely  fight  being  a  farre  of : 
whereof  Ltccan  lib.  9.  faith  thus, 

Sibilaque  effundens  ctintfias  terrentia  pejles. 
Ante  venena  nocens,  lat^  fchi  fuhmouct  omne 
Vulgus^  et  ill  vacua  7'egnat  BafUicus  arena. 
And  Mantuan  in  like  manner, 

Natiis  in  ardeitti  Libyce  Bafdifcus  arena, 
Vulne7'at  aspe(flu,  luminibufque  necat. 


I\- 


'Ike  as  the  fillle  Bird 2jmA?,  the  night, 
When  Birders  beate  the  bufh,  and  fliake  his  nefl, 
He  fluttring  forth  flreight  flies  vnto  the  light, 
As  if  it  were  the  day  newe  fprong  from  Eaft, 
Where  fo  his  wilfull  wings  confume  away. 
That  needes  he  muft  become  the  Birders  pray  : 
Or,  as  the  Flye.,  when  candles  are  alight, 
Still  playes  about  the  flame  vntill  he  burne  : 
Euen  fo  my  heart  hath  feene  a  heau'nly  fight, 
Wherehence  againe  it  hardly  can  returne  : 

Thebeames  thereof  conteine  fuch  wondrous  flame, 
That  loue  him  felfe  would  burne  to  fee  the  fame. 
I  meane  a  Virgins  face,  whofe  beautie  rare. 
Much  like  the  Bafiliqice  in  Lyhia  foyle, 
With  onely  fight  is  caufe  of  all  my  care. 
And  loads  my  yeelding  heart  with  endleffe  toyle  ; 
Yet  needes  I  muft  confeffe  fhe  hath  more  grace, 
Then  all  the  NimpJies  that  haunt  Dianacs  chafe. 


i\ 


X  L  I  X.  85 


The  Author  in  this  Song  bewrayeth  his  dayly  Pafsions  in  loue  to 
be  fo  troublefome,  that  to  auoide  the  flames  thereof,  hce  gladly 
and  faine  vould  yeelde  himfelfe  to  die,  were  it  not  that  he 
feareth  a  further  inconuenience  would  then  arife.  For  he 
doubteth  leaft  thofe  flames,  wherein  his  foule  continuallye 
burnetii,  fliall  make  Charon  afraide  to  graunt  him  paffage  ouer 
the  Lake  of  Stix^  by  reafon,  his  old  withered  boat  is  apt  to 
take  fire. 


fo  great  a  Light  hath  fet  my  mind  on  fire, 
That  flelh  and  boane  confume  with  fecreat  flame, 
Each  vaine  dries  vp,  wit  yeeldes  to  deepe  defire : 
I  fcarce  (alas)  dare  fay,  for  very  fliame, 

How  faine  my  foule  an  interchaunge  would  make 
T\vixt  this  her  prefent  State  and  Liiiibo  lake; 
And  yet  fhe  dread's,  leafl  when  fhe  partes  from  hence. 
Her  Heates  be  fuch,  that  Charoji  will  retire. 
And  let  her  paffe  for  prayer,  nor  for  ^  pence. 
For  feare  his  with'red  boat  be  fet  on  fire  j 

So  daung'rous  are  the  flames  of  Mighty  Loue 
In  Stix  it  felfe,  in  earth,  or  heau'n  aboue. 
WTierefore  deere  Dame  voutchfafe  to  rew  my  cafe, 
And  falue  the  foare  which  thou  thy  felfe  hafl  made  : 
My  Heates  firfl  grew  by  gazing  on  thy  face, 
Whofe  lights  were  fuch,  that  I  could  find  no  fliade  : 
And  thou  my  weary  Soule  bend  all  thy  force, 
By  Plaintes  and  Teares  to  moue  her  to  remorfe. 

1  Naulum  intelligit,  de  quo  luuenal ;  Misenun  est  post  omnia  perdere  nauluttt. 


86  L. 


In  this  Pafsion  is  effecftually  fet  downe,  in  how  flraunge  a  cafe  he 
liueth  that  is  in  loue,  and  in  how  contrary  an  eflate  to  all  other 
men,  which  are  at  defiaunce  with  the  like  follye.  And  this  the 
Authour  expreffeth  here  in  his  owne  perfon  :  therewithal!  call- 
ing vpon  Loue,  to  Hand  his  frend  ;  or,  if  he  faile,  vpon  death, 
to  cut  of  his  wearyfome  life. 


i^\T;7'Hile  others  feede,  my  fancy  makes  me  fafl ; 
c(ljX  While  others  Hue  fecure,  I  feare  mifchaunce j 
I  dread  no  force,  where  other  ftand  agafl ; 
I  follow  fute  where  Fortune  leades  the  Z>aunce, 
Who  like  a  mumming  mate  fo  throwes  the  Dice, 
That  Reafon  leefmg  all,  Loue  winnes  the  price ; 
Which  Loue  by  force  fo  worketh  in  my  brefl, 
That  needes  perforce  I  mufL  encline  my  will 
To  die  in  dreames,  whiles  others  Hue  in  reft, 
And  Hue  in  woes  while  others  feele  none  ill. 

O  gentle  Death  let  heere  my  dayes  haue  ende, 
Or  mightie  Loue,  fo  vfe  me  as  thy  frend. 
Mine  eyes  are  worne  with  teares,  my  wittes  with  woe, 
My  coulour  dride  with  cares,  my  hart  with  paines. 
My  will  bewitcht,  my  limmes  confumed  foe. 
That  fcarfely  bloud,  or  vitall  breath  remaynes : 

While  others  ioy,  or  fleepe,  I  wayle  and  wake  : 
All  this  {Deere  Dame,)  I  fuffer  for  thy  fake. 


LI.  S7 


Titytis  was  the  fonne  of  lupiter,  and  for  attempting  to  diflionefl 
Latotia,  was  flaine  by  Apollo.  Since  which  time  the  Poetes 
faine  that  for  puniflmient  he  lieth  in  hell,  miferably  tormented 
with  a  rauening  I'ulinre,  which  feedeth  vpon  his  bowels  con- 
tinuallie  :  and  they  as  they  are  confumcd,  flill  miraculoufly 
growe  vp  againe,  to  breed  his  endlefle  miferie,  as  the  Poet 
witncfTeth, 

Quid  dicam  Tityum,  cuius  fuh  iithiere/a'uo         Claud,  in  Gi- 
yi/cera  nafcuntur  grauibus  ccrtantia  pcenis  ?        gantomachia. 

The  Authour  compareth   his  pafsions  with   the    paines  of  this 
Tiiyus,  and  imitateth  Semca  writing  to  the  like  efiecl, 

Vultur  reli(flo  tranfuolet  Tityo  ferus^ 

Meumque  pcoicE  femper  accrefcat  iecur. 


fF  Tityus  \\Tetched  \vight  beheld  my  paines, 
He  would  confeffe  his  woundes  to  be  but  fmall, 
A  Vultur  worfe  then  his  teares  all  my  vaines, 
Yet  neuer  lets  me  die,  nor  Hue  at  all : 

Would  Gods  a  while  I  might  poffefTe  his  place, 
To  iudge  of  both,  which  were  in  better  cafe. 
The  Hell  is  darke,  wherein  he  fuffreth  fmarte. 
And  wants  not  fome  Compartners  of  his  greefe  : 
I  Hue  in  Light,  and  fee  what  hurtes  my  hart, 
But  want  fome  mourning  mates  for  my  releefe  ; 

His  Paine  is  iufl  rewarde,  his  crimes  were  fuch  : 
My  greatefl  fault  is  this,  I  loue  too  much. 
Why  then,  fmce  too  much  loue  can  breede  offence, 
Thou  daung'rous  Bird,  the  roote  of  my  defire, 
Goe  pearch  elswhere,  remoue  thy  felfe  from  hence  ; 
I  freeze  like  Ife,  and  burne  like  flaming  fire  : 
Yet  flay  good  Bird  :  for  if  thou  foare  away, 
Twixt  Frofl  and  Flame  my  dayes  will  foone  decay. 


88  LI  I. 


Here  the  Authour  after  fome  dolorous  difcourfe  of  his  vnhap- 
pines,  and  rehearfall  of  fome  particular  hurtes  which  he 
fufleineth  in  the  purfute  of  his  loue  :  firft  quellioneth  with  his 
Lady  of  his  deferte  ;  and  then,  as  hauinge  made  a  fufficiente 
proofe  of  his  innocency,  perfwadeth  her  to  pitie  him,  whom 
Ihe  herfelfe  hath  hurte.  Moreouer  it  is  to  be  noted,  that  the 
firfh  letters  of  all  the  verfes  in  this  Pafsion  being  ioyned  together 
as  they  fland,  do  conteine  this  pofie  agreeable  to  his  meaning, 
Amor  mepungit  et  vrit. 


A  VAc  World  of  woes  doth  raigne  within  mybrefl, 

m  off^  My  penfiue  thoughtes  are  cou'red  all  with  care, 

o  Of  all  that  fmg  the  Swanne  doth  pleafe  me  befl. 

r  Reflraint  of  ioyes  exiles  my  woonted  fare, 

M  Mad  mooded  Loue  vfurping  Reafons  place 

e  Extremitie  doth  ouer  rule  the  cafe. 

P  Paine  drieth  vp  my  vaines  and  vitall  bloud, 

u  Vnleffe  the  Saint  I  ferue  geue  helpe  in  time  : 

n  None  els,  but  Ihe  alone,  can  do  me  good. 

g  Graunt  then  ye  Gods,  that  firfl  flie  may  not  clime 

i  Immortall  heau'ns,  to  Hue  with  Saintes  aboue, 

t  Then  fhe  vouchfafe  to  yeeld  me  loue  for  loue. 

E  Examine  well  the  time  of  my  diflreffe 

t  Thou  dainty  Dame,  for  whom  I  pine  away, 

V  Vnguyltie  though,  as  needes  thou  mufl  confeffe, 

r  Remembring  but  the  caufe  of  my  decay  : 

i  In  vewing  thy  fweete  face  arofe  my  griefe, 

t.  Therefore  in  tyme  vouchfafe  me  fome  reliefe. 


LI  1 1.  89 


The  two  firfl  partes  of  this  Sonnet,  are  an  imitation  of  certaine 
Greeke  verfes  of  Theocritus  ;  which  verfes  as  they  arc  tranflated 
by  many  good  Poets  of  later  dayes,  fo  mofte  apt  lye  and  plainely 
by  C.  Vrcimis  Vcliiis  in  his  Epigrammes ;  hee  beginneth  thus, 
Nuptr  apis  furem  pupiigit  violenter  Amorem 
Ipfum  ex  aliteolis  clam  mella  faticfqtte  legententy 
Cui  fummos  mantitim  digitos  conjixit,  at  ille 
Indohtit,  lafie  tiimucnint  viibicre palmcE  : 
Platixit  /in mum,  et  faltu  trcpidans pnlfanit,  et  ipft 
OjL'nd£/is  Fc'ueri,  cafum  narrauit  cuerbum,  etc. 


i^VT -7  Here  tender  Lotie  had  laide  him  downe  to  fleepe, 
^^▼^^  A  Httle  Bee  fo  flong  his  fingers  end, 

That  burning  ache  enforced  him  to  weepe 
And  call  for  ^F/iebtis  Sonne  to  fland  his  frend, 
To  whome  he  cride,  I  mufe  fo  fmall  a  thing 
Can  pricke  thus  deepe  with  fuche  a  little  Sting. 
VVhy  fo,  fweet  Boy,  quoth  Vetnts  fitting  by? 
Thy  felfe  is  yong,  thy  arrowes  are  but  fmall 
And  yet  thy  fhotte  makes  hardefl  harts  to  cry? 
To  Phcbus  Sunne  fhe  turned  therewithall, 

And  prayde  him  fhew  his  skill  to  cure  the  fore, 
Whofe  like  her  Boy  had  neuer  felt  before. 
Then  he  with  Herbes  recured  foone  the  wound, 
Which  being  done,  he  threw  the  Herbes  away,   [ground, 
Whofe  force,   through  touching  Lone,    in   felfe   fame 
By  hapleffe  hap  did  breede  my  hartes  decay: 

For  there  they  fell,  where  long  my  hart  had  li'ne 
To  waite  for  Lone,  and  what  he  fliould  affigne. 

1  AEsculMpius. 


90  LI  1 1 1. 


In  this  Pafsion  the  Authour  boafleth,  howe  found  a  pleafure  he 
lately  enioyed  in  the  companie  of  his  Beloued,  by  pleafing 
effedlually  all  his  hue  fenfes  exterior,  and  that  through  the  onely 
benefite  of  her  friendly  prefence,  and  extraordinarie  fauour  to- 
wards him.  And  in  many  choyfe  particulars  of  this  Sonnet, 
he  imitateth  here  and  there  a  verfe  of  Roji/ardes,  in  a  certaine 
Elegie  to  lanet peintre  du  Roy:  which  beginneth  thus, 

Pein  nioi,  Janet,  pein  moi  ie  tefupplie 
Dans  ce  tableau  les  beautis  de  ni'a??iie 
De  lafa^on,  etc. 


v^\T;7'Hat  happie  howre  was  that  I  lately  pafl 
fiv^  With  her,  in  whome  I  fedde  my  fenfes  all? 
With  one  fure  fealed  kiffe  I  pleas'd  my  taft; 
Mine  eares  with  woordes,  which  feemed  Muficall; 

My  fmelling  with  her  breath,  like  Ciuet  fweete; 

My  touch  in  place  where  modeflie  thought  meete. 
But  fhall  I  fay,  what  obiectes  held  mine  eye? 
Her  curled  Lockes  of  Golde,  like  Tagus  fandes; 
Her  Forehead  fmooth  and  white  as  luory, 
Where  Glory,  State  and  BaJJifullnes  held  handes; 

Her  Eyes,  one  making  Peace,  the  other  Warres; 

By  Venus  one,  the  other  rul'd  by  Mars ; 
Her  Egles  Nofe;  her  Scarlate  Cheekes  halfe  white; 
Her  Teeth  of  Orient  Pearle;  her  gracious  fmile; 
Her  dimpled  Chinne;  her  Breafl  as  cleere  as  light; 
Her  Hand  like  hers,  ^who  Tithon  did  beguile. 

For  worldly  ioyes  who  might  compare  with  mee, 

While  thusT  fedde  each  fenfe  in  his  degree? 

1  Aurora. 


LV.  91 


The  whole  inuention  of  all  this  Pafsion  is  deducf^ed  out  o^  Stra- 
phine.  Sonnet  63.  whofe  verfes  if  you  reade,  you  will  iudge  this 
Authors  imitation  the  more  praife  worthy ;  thefe  they  are, 
Coffie  alma  ajfai  bramofa  e  poco  accorta 

Che  ntai  vi/io  hatica  aniorfe  nion  depiitto, 
Difpofi  vn  di  cercarfuo  Laberinto, 
Vedere  el  mon  Iro,  e  tanta  gente  inorta. 
Ma  qttt'lfil  dh-agioti  che  chi  per  fcorta 
Del  qiialfii  tutto  el  ceco  loco  cinto 
Suhito,  aJiime,  fit  da  lui  rotto  e  viiifo, 
Talc  he  mai  pin  troiiar  feppi  la  porta. 


S\li{^  heedelefle  hart  which  Lone  yet  neuer  knew. 


^^  But  as  he  was  defcrib'd  with  Painters  hand, 
One  day  amongfl  the  refl  would  needes  goe  view 
The  Labyrinth  of  Loiie^  with  all  his  band. 
To  fee  the  Minotaure  his  ougly  face, 
And  fuch  as  there  lay  flaine  within  the  place. 
But  foone  my  guiding  thrid  by  Reafon  fpunne, 
Wherewith  I  paft  a  long  his  darkefome  caue, 
Was  broake  (alas)  by  him,  and  ouerrunne, 
And  I  perforce  became  his  captiue  flaue : 

Since  when  as  yet  I  neuer  found  the  way 
To  leaue  that  maze,  wherein  fo  many  flray. 
Yet  thou  on  whome,  mine  eyes  haue  gaz'd  fo  longe 
May'fl,  if  thou  wilt,  play  Ariadnaes  part. 
And  by  a  fecond  Thrid  reuenge  the  wronge, 
Which  through  deceit  hath  hurt  my  guiltleffe  hart ; 
Vouchfafe  in  time  to  faue  and  fet  me  free, 
Which  feeke  and  ferue  none  other  Saint  but  thee. 


92  LVI. 


The  firfl  Staffe  of  this  Pafsion  is  much  like  vnto  that  inuention  of 
Seraphtne  in  his  Strambotti,  where  he  faith, 

Morte:  chevoui?  tebramo:  Eccomi  apprejfo ; 

Pi'endenii:  a  che?  che  nianchi  el  mio  dolore; 
Nonpqffo:  ohime,  non  puoi?  non  per  adejfo ; 
Per  che?  perb  che  in  te  non  regna  il  core.  etc. 
The  fecond  Staffe  fomewhat  imitateth  an  other  of  his  Strambotti 
in  the  fame  leafe ;  it  beginneth  thus, 

Amor,  amor:  chi  ^  quel  che  chiama  tanto? 
Vn  tuo  feruo  fidel ;  uon  ti  conofco  ;  etc. 
The  Authour  in  the  lafte  Staffe,  returneth  to  entreate  Death  a 
new,  to  ende  his  dayes,  as  being  halfe  perfwaded  that  Lone 
would  reftore  vnto  him  his  hart  againe. 


A/p^  Ome  gentle  Death;  who  cals?  one  thats  opprefl: 

(f/c^What  is  thy  will?  that  thou  abridge  my  woe, 
By  cutting  of  my  life ;  ceafe  thy  requefl, 
I  cannot  kill  thee  yet:  alas,  why  foe? 
Thou  want'fl  thy  Hart.   Who  floale  the  fame  away? 
Zoue,  whom  thou  feru'fl,  intreat  him  fi  thou  may. 

Come,  come,  come  Zoue:  who  calleth  me  fo  oft? 

Thy  Vaffall  true,  whome  thou  fhould'fl  know  by  right. 

What  makes  thy  cry  fo  faint?  my  voyce  is  fofte. 

And  almofl  fpent  by  wayling  day  and  night. 

Why  then,  whats  thy  requefl?  that  thou  reflore 
To  me  my  Hart,  and  fteale  the  fame  no  more. 

And  thou,  O  Death,  when  I  poffeffe  my  Har/^ 

Difpatch  me  then  at  once:  why  fo? 

By  promife  thou  art  bound  to  end  my  fmart. 

Why,  if  thy  Ifarf  retume,  then  whats  thy  woe? 
That  brought  from  colde,  It  neuer  will  defire 
To  refl  with  me,  which  am  more  hote  then  fire. 


LVII.  93 


Here  the  Authour  cheerefully  comforting  himfelfe,  rebuketh  all 
thofe  his  frendes,  or  others  whatfouer,  which  pitie  his  eflate 
in  Lone:  and  groundeth  his  inuention,  for  the  mofle  part,  vpon 
the  old  Latine  Prouerhe,  Conjuctiido  ejl  altera  tiatura.  Which 
Prouerbe  hee  confirmcth  by  two  examples ;  the  one,  of  him, 
that  being  borne  farre  North  feldome  ketcheth  colde ;  the  other 
of  the  Negro,  which  beinge  borne  vnder  a  hote  climate,  is 
neuer  fmoothered  with  ouermuch  heate. 


Sj?^\Ll  yee,  that  greeue  to  thinke  my  death  fo  neere, 


(^^  Take  pitie  on  yourfelues,  whofe  thought  is  blind; 
Can  there  be  Day,  vnlefle  fome  Light  appeare? 
Can  fire  be  colde,  which  yeeldeth  heate  by  kinde? 
If  Lone  were  pafl,  my  life  would  foone  decay, 
Lone  bids  me  hoape,  and  hoape  is  all  my  flay. 
And  you,  that  fee  in  what  eflate  I  fland, 
Now  hote,  now  colde,  and  yet  am  liuing  flill, 
Perfuade  your  felues,  Loue  hath  a  mightie  hand. 
And  cudome  frames,  what  pleafeth  befl  her  wil. 
A  ling'ring  vfe  of  Lone  hath  taught  my  brefl 
To  harbor  flrife,  and  yet  to  Hue  in  refl. 
The  man  that  dwelles  farre  North,  hath  feldome  harme 
With  blafl  of  winters  wind  or  nipping  frofl : 
The  Negro  feldome  feeles  himfelfe  too  warme 
*  If  he  abide  within  his  natiue  coafl; 
So,  Loue  in  me  a  Second  Nature  is, 
And  cuflome  makes  me  thinke  my  Woes  are  Bliffe. 

1  For  both  experience  teacheth  and  smothered  with  the  heate  of  the  coun- 
Philosophical  reason  approueth,  than  trey  though  Spaine  be  more  tempe- 
an  Ethyopian  may  easily  in  Spaine  be    rate  than  Ethyopia  is. 


94 


LVIII. 


Aetjia,  called  in  times  pafl  Ine/ia,  as  VolatcTranus  witneffeth,  is 
a  hollow  hill  in  Sicilia,  whofe  toppe  burneth  continuallie,  the 
fire  being  maintained  with  a  vaine  of  brimftone,  and  other  fuch 
like  Mineralles,  which  are  within  the  faid  Mountaine.  Which 
notwithflanding,  the  bottome  of  the  hill  is  verie  pleafant,  as 
well  for  the  aboundance  of  fweete  fruites  and  flowers,  as  for  the 
number  of  freflne  fpringes  and  fountaines.  The  Poetes  faine, 
that  when  luppiter  had  with  his  thunderboltes  beaten  downe 
the  Gyantes  of  the  earth,  which  rebelled  againft  heauen,  he 
did  forthwith  couer  and  oppreffe  them  all  with  the  weight  of 
this  hill  Aetna.  Thefe  thinges  being  well  confidered,  together 
with  the  verfe  of  Horace-, 

(Deus  inwiortalis  haberi  De  arte  Poetica. 

Dum  cupit  Empedocles,  ardeniem  fi'igidus  yEtnam 
Infduit. ) 

It  may  eafily  appeare,  why  the  Author  in  this  pafsiou  compareth 
his  heart  vnto  the  hill. 


^fj}  Here  is  a  monflrous  hill  m  Sia//  foyle, 
^j\  Where  workes  that  limping  God,  which  Vzilcanhight, 
^^And  rebell  Gyantes  lurke,  whome  loi/e  did  foyle, 
When  gainfl  the  heau'ns  they  durll  prefume  to  fight; 
The  toppe  thereof  breathes  out  a  burning  flame, 
And  jF/ora  fittes  at  bottome  of  the  fame. 
My  fwelling  heart  is  fuch  an  other  hill, 
Wherein  a  bhnded  God  bearcs  all  the  fwaye. 
And  rebell  thoughtes  refifLing  reafons  fkill 
Are  bound  by  will  from  flarting  thence  awaye; 

The  toppe  thereof  doth  fmoake  with  fcalding  fmart. 
And  feldome  ioyes  obtaine  the  lowefl  parte. 
Yet  learne  herewith  the  diffrence  of  the  twaine : 
Empedocles  confum'd  with  Aetnaes  fire 
When  godheade  there  he  fought,  but  all  in  vaine : 
But  this  my  heart,  all  flaming  with  defire, 
Embraceth  in  it  felfe  an  Angels  face. 
Which  beareth  rule  as  Goddeffe  of  the  place. 


S 


LIX.  95 


The  Author  in  this  Pafsion  accufeth  his  owne  eyes,  as  the  princi- 
pal! or  onelie  caufe  of  his  amorous  infelicitie :  wherein  his 
hearle  is  fo  opprefTed  continuallie  with  euils,  which  are  con- 
trarie  in  them  felues,  that  reafon  can  beare  no  fwaye  in  the 
caufe.  Therefore  in  the  ende,  he  inftantlie  entreateth  his  Ladle 
of  her  fpeedie  fauoure  and  goodwill,  alleaginge  what  hurte 
may  growe  through  her  longer  delaye. 


P  Hat  thing,  wherein  mine  eyes  haue  mofl  delight, 
1^1  Is  greateft.  caufe  my  heart  doth  fuffer  paine : 

Such  is  the  hurt  that  comes  by  wanton  fight; 

Which  reafon  flriues  to  vanquifli  all  in  vaine; 

This  onely  fenfe,  more  quicke  then  all  the  red, 
Hath  kindled  holie  fire  ^vithin  my  breR. 
And  fo  my  mourning  hearte  is  parching  drie 
With  fending  fighes  abroade,  and  keeping  care, 
What  needes  it  mufl  confume  if  longe  it  lye 
In  place,  where  fuch  a  flame  doth  make  repare: 

This  flame  is  Zoi/e,  whome  none  may  well  intreate, 

But  onely  fhee,  for  whome  I  fuffer  heate. 
Then  peereleffe  Dame,  the  ground  of  all  my  griefe, 
Voutfafe  to  cure  the  caufe  of  my  complainte : 
No  fauoure  els  but  thine  can  yeelde  reliefe. 
But  helpe  in  time,  before  I  further  fainte, 
„       P^or  Daunger  growes  by  lingringe  till  the  lafl, 
„      And  phifick  hath  no  helpe,  when  life  is  pafl. 


96 


LX. 


The  Authour  groundeth  this  Pafsion  vpon  three  poyntes.  In  the 
firft,  he  fheweth  how  he  witting  and  wilfully  followeth  his 
owne  hurt,  with  fuch  like  words  as  Medcea  fometime  vfed, 

Video  meliora,  proboque,  Oy\A  Metam 

Deteriora  fequor,  etc.  ""■  ^' 

In  the  fecond,  he  excufeth  his  fault  vpon  the  maine  force  and 
tyrannie  of  Loue,  being  the  onely  gouernour  of  his  wil.  And 
laflly,  he  humbly  entreateth  his  Lady  for  the  reflitution  of  his 
wonted  libertie :  defiring  her  not  to  exadl  more  of  him,  then 
his  abilitie  of  bodie  or  mind  can  well  fufleine,  according  to  the 
olde  verfe, 

Pelle  magis  rabida  nihil  ejl  de  Vulpe petendum. 


[■^^^As  euer  man,  whofe  Loue  was  like  to  mine? 
^^T\T^  I  follow  flill  the  caufe  of  my  diftreffe, 

My  Hart  forefeeing  hurte,  doth  yet  encline 
To  feeke  the  fame,  andthinkes  the  harmethe  lefTe. 
In  doing  thus,  you  afke  me  what  I  ayle : 
AgainfL  maine  force  what  reafon  can  preuaile? 
Loue  is  the  Lord  and  Signor  of  my  will, 
How  fliall  I  then  difpofe  of  any  deede? 
By  forced  Bond,  he  holdes  my  freedome  flill. 
He  duls  each  fenfe,  and  makes  my  hart  to  bleede. 
Thou  Sacred  Nimph,  whofe  vertue  wanteth  flaine, 
Agree  with  Loue,  and  fet  me  free  againe. 
Of  this  my  weary  Life  no  day  fhall  fall, 
Wherein  my  penne  fhall  once  thy  praife  forget : 
No  Night  with  fleepe  fhall  clofe  mine  eyes  at  all, 
Before  I  make  recount  of  fuch  a  debt; 

Then  force  me  not  to  more  then  well  I  may, 
Befides  his  Skinne,  the  Fox  hath  nought  to  pay. 


i 

\ 


LXI.  97 


Ihe  inuention  of  this  Pafsion  is  borrowed,  for  the  mofl  parte  from 
Sn-aphitu  Son.  125.  Which  beginneth, 

Sd  gratt  tormento  i  fier  fulmini  accejl 

Ferduti  hatw/si,  e  li  fuoi Jtrali  Amore^ 
I  ri'/io  tanti  traffitti  in  meggio  el  core^ 
Chifol  da  me  li  potriano  ejfer  reft ; 

Efe  de  gli  ampli  mari  in  terra  Jlefi 

Fitffc prriuo  A\ptuno,  io  fpando  fore 
Lagry'tne  iante,  che  con  pin  liquore 
Fotrebbe  nuoui  mari  haiier  riprefi ;  etc. 


§F  Lone  had  lofl  his  fhaftes,  and  loue  dc^vlle  threw 
His  thundring  boltes,  and  fpent  his  forked  fire, 
They  onely  might  recou'red  be  anew 
From  out  my  Hart  crofwounded  with  defire; 
Or  if  Debate  by  Mars  were  lofl  a  fpace, 
It  might  be  found  within  the  felfe  fame  place; 
If  Neptunes  waues  were  all  dride  vp  and  gone, 
My  weeping  eyes  fo  many  teares  diflill, 
That  ^eater  Seas  might  grow  by  them  alone ; 
Or  if  no  flame  were  yet  remajniing  flill 

In  Vulcans  forge,  he  might  from  out  my  brefl 
Make  choife  of  fuch  as  fhould  befit  him  befl. 
If  Aeole  were  depriu'd  of  all  his  charge, 
Yet  foone  could  I  reflore  his  windes  againe, 
By  fobbing  fighes,  which  forth  I  blow  at  large, 
To  moue  her  mind  that  pleafures  in  my  paine ; 
What  man,  but  I,  could  thus  encline  his  will 
To  Hue  in  Loue,  which  hath  no  end  of  ill? 


98  LXII. 


That  the  vulgar  forte  may  the  better  vnderRand  this  Pafsion,  I 
will  briefly  touch  thofe,  whom  the  Author  nameth  herein, 
being  al  damned  foules  (as  the  Poets  faine)  and  deftinate  vnto 
fundrie  puniflimentes.  Ta7italus  hauing  his  lippes  dill  at  the 
brinke  of  the  riuer  Erida/ms,  yet  dieth  for  thirfl.  Ixion  is 
tied  vnto  a  wheele;  which  tumeth  inceflantly.  A  vulture 
feedeth  vpon  the  bowels  of  Tiiyiis,  which  growe  vp  againe 
euer  as  they  are  deuoured.  Sifyphtis  rowleth  a  great  rounde 
floane  vp  a  fteepe  hill,  which  being  once  at  the  top  prefently 
falleth  downe  amaine.  Belides  are  fifty  fifters,  whofe  continuall 
taske  is,  to  fill  a  bottomleffe  tub  full  of  water,  by  lading  in 
their  pitchers  full  at  once. 


m. 


uT^N  that  I  thirfl  for  fuch  a  Goddeffe  grace 
rA  As  wantes  remorfe,  Hke  Tantalus  I  die; 


My  ftate  is  e  quail  to  Ixions  cafe, 
Whofe  rented  limm's  ar  turn'd  eternally, 

In  that  my  toffmg  toyies  can  haue  no  end,  [friend. 
Nor  time,  nor  place,  nor  chaunce  will  fland  my 
In  that  my  heart  confuming  neuer  dyes, 
I  feele  with  Tityus  an  equall  payne, 
On  whome  an  euer  feeding  Vultur  lyes ; 
In  that  I  ryfe  through  hope,  and  fall  againe 
By  feare,  like  SifypJms  I  labour  fLill 
To  turle  a  rowling  floane  againfl  the  hill ; 
In  that  I  make  my  vowes  to  her  alone, 
Whofe  eares  are  deafe,  and  will  reteine  no  found, 
With  Belides  my  flate  is  all  but  one. 
Which  fill  a  tub,  whofe  bottome  is  not  found. 

A  wondrous  thing,  yatLouefhouldmake  the  wound, 
Wherein  a  fecond  Hell  may  thus  be  found. 


LXIII.  99 


Loue  hath  two  arrowes,  as  Conradus  Celt'is  witneflTeth  in  thefe 
two  verfes : 

Per  niatris  ajlnim,  et  per  fcra  fpcciila^  Odarum.  lib.  i. 

Qua:  bina  fert  ficuus  Cu/iiio,  etc. 

The  one  is  made  of  leade,  the  other  of  golde,  and  either  of 
them  different  in  quality  from  the  other.  The  Authour  ther- 
fore  faineth  in  this  Pafsion,  that  when  Cupid  had  flroken  him 
M-ith  that  of  lead,  foone  after  pittying  his  painefull  eflate,  he 
thought  good  to  flnke  his  bcloued  with  tlie  other.  But  her 
brefl  was  fo  hard,  that  the  fliaft  rebounding  backe  againe, 
wounded  Loue  him  felfe  at  vnawares.  Wherehence  fell  out 
thefe  three  inconueniences ;  firfl,  that  Loue  himfelfe  became 
her  thrall,  whome  hee  Ihoulde  haue  conquered ;  then,  that  (lie 
became  proud,  where  flie  fliouldhaue  been  friendly;  and  laflly, 
that  the  Authour  by  this  meanes  defpaireth  to  haue  any  recure 
of  his  vnquiet  life,  and  therfore  defireth  a  fpeedie  death,  as 
alluding  to  thofe  fententious  verfes  of  Sophocles. 

tL  yap  ^poTuv  av  ^vv  KaKoTs  fiefiLyixevuv  Elcctra. 

dvTi<TKeLV  b  fj^Wujv,  Tov  xpoVoii  KepSos  (pepoi. 
which  may  be  thus  Englif^ied  paraphraftically. 

^l^/ia/  can  ii  him  auaile  to  line  a  lohile, 

WhomCy  of  all  others^  euilles  are  betyde? 


[fS  Oue  hath  two  fliaftes,  the  one  of  beaten  gold, 
IjBy  flroake  whcrof  a  fweete  effect  is  wrought: 
CC!^  The  other  is  of  lumpiflie  leaden  mould, 

And  worketh  none  effect,  but  what  is  nought: 
Within  my  breft  the  latter  of  the  twaine     [paine. 
Breades  feare,  feare  thought,  and  thought  a  lafling 
One  day  amongfl  the  red  fweete  Lone  beganne 
To  pitty  mine  eflate,  and  thought  it  befl 
To  perce  my  Deare  with  golde,  that  fhe  might  fcanne 
My  cafe  aright,  and  turne  my  toyles  to  refl : 

But  from  her  brefl.  more  hard  then  hardefl  flint 
His  fliafte  flewe  backe,  and  in   him  felfe   made 
And  this  is  caufe  that  Loue  doth  floup  her  lure,    [printe. 
Whofe  heart  he  thought  to  conquere  for  my  fake; 
That  file  is  i)roude;  and  I  without  recure: 
Wliich  triple  hurtedoth  caufe  my  hope  to  quake :    [difeafe, 
Hoape  lofl  breedes  griefe,  griefe  paine,  and  paine 
Difeafebringes  death,  which  death  will  onelyplcafe. 


roo  LXIIII. 


This  Pafsion  is  of  like  frame  and  fafliion  with  that,  which  was 
before  vnder  the  number  of  XLI.  whetherto  I  referre  the 
Reader.  But  touching  the  fenfe  or  fubftance  of  this  Pafsion, 
it  is  euident,  that  herein  the  Authour,  by  layinge  open  the  long 
continued  grieuefomnes  of  his  mifery  in  Loue,  feeketh  to  moue 
his  Millres  to  fome  compafsion. 


I Y  humble  fute  hath  fet  my  minde  on  pride, 
f^4^  Which  pride  is  caufe  thou  haft  me  in  difdaine. 
By  which  difdaine  my  woundes  are  made  fo  wide, 
Thatwideneffeofmywoundesaugmentesmypaine, 
Which  Paine  is  caufe,  by  force  of  fecreate  iarres, 
That  I  fuflaine  a  brunt  of  priuate  Warres. 
But  ceafe  deere  Dame  to  kindle  further  flrife, 
Let  Strifes  haue  ende,  and  Peace  enioy  their  place ; 
If  Peace  take  place,  Pitie  may  faue  my  life. 
For  Pitie  Ihould  be  Ihow'ne  to  fuch  as  trace        [awry, 
Mofl  daung'rous  wayes,  and  tread  their  flepp's 
Or  Hue  my  woes :  and  fuch  a  one  am  I. 
Therefore  My  Deere  Delight  regard  my  Loue, 
Whome  Loue  doth  force  to  follow  Fond  Defire, 
Which  Fond  Defire  no  counfell  can  remoue; 
For  what  can  counfell  doe,  to  quench  the  fire 

That  fires  my  hart  through  fancies  wanton  will? 
„       Faticie  by  kind  with  Reofo7ijiriuethjlill. 


LXV.  lof 


In  the  firfl  and  fecond  part  of  this  pafsion,  the  Author  proueth 
by  examples,  or  rather  by  manner  of  argument,  A  niaiori  ad 
minus,  that  he  may  with  good  reafon  yeeld  him  felfe  to  the 
imperie  oi  Loue,  whome  the  gods  them  feUies  obey ;  as  htppiter 
in  heauen,  Neptune  in  the  feas,  and  Pluto  in  hell.  In  the  laft 
flaffe  he  imitateth  certaine  Italian  verfcs  of  M.  Girolamo  Para- 
bcfco;  which  are,  as  foUoweth. 

Occhi  tuoi,  anzijlclle  alvie,  etfatali,  Selua  Seconda. 

Oue  ha  prcfcritto  il  del  mio  mal,  viio  bene : 
Alie  lagrimey  e/o/pir,  mio  ri/o.  e  canto  ; 
Miafpene,  mio  timar ;  mio  foco  e  gicucio  \ 
Mia  noia,  mio  piacer  \  mia  vito  c  morte. 


l^f'T/Ho  knoweth  not,  how  often  Ve7tus  fonne 
jYv^  Hath  forced  luppiter  to  leaue  his  feate? 
Or  els,  how  often  Neptune  he  hath  wunne 
From  feaes  to  fandes,  to  play  fome  wanton  feate? 
Or,  howe  he  hath  conflraind  the  Lord  oi  Stix 
To  come  on  earth,  to  practife  louing  trickes? 
If  heau'n,  if  feaes,  if  hell  miifl  needes  obay, 
And  all  therein  be  fubiect  vnto  Loue-y 
What  fhall  it  then  auaile,  if  I  gainfay. 
And  to  my  double  hurt  his  pow'r  do  proue? 
No,  no,  I  yeeld  my  felfe,  as  is  but  meete: 
For  hetherto  with  fow'r  he  yeeldes  me  fweet. 
From  out  my  Mi/Ires  eyes,  two  lightfome  flarres, 
He  deflinates  eflate  of  double  kinde, 
My  teares,  my  fmyling  cheere;  my  peace,  my  warres; 
My  fighes,  my  fonges ;  my  feare,  my  hoping  minde ; 
My  fyre,  my  frofl;  my  ioy,  my  forrowes  gall; 
My  curfe,  my  prayfe;  my  death,  but  life  with  all 


I02  LXVI. 


This   Latine   pafsion   is   borrowed   from  Petrarch  Sonetto   133. 
•  which  beginneth. 

Hor,  chH  del,  e  la  terra  <?'/  vento  tace, 
E  le  fere,  e  gli  angelli  ilfonno  affrena, 
Notte  '/  carro  Jlellato  in  giro  mena, 
E  nelfuo  letto  il  mar  feiiT! onda  giace  ;  etc. 

Wherein  he  imitated  Virgill,  fpeaking  of  Dido,  thus. 
Nox  erat,  et  taciiu?n  carpebant  fejfa  foporem 
Corpora  etc. 
And  this  Author  prefumeth,  vpon  the  paines  he  hath  taken,  in 
faithfully  tranflating  it,  to  place  it  amongft  thefe  his  owne 
pafsions,  for  a  figne  of  his  greate  fufiferance  in  loue. 


\Llpi  Vm  coslum,  dum  terra  facet,  ventufque  fdefcit, 

^f3T      Dumqueferas,  volucrefque  quies  comple^ltur  alta, 
Noxque  agit  in  gyrumjlellantes  fydere  cur r us., 
Inquefuo  le6lo  recuhatfmeflumine  Fontus, 

Multa  ego  contemplor;  Jiudeo;  conflagro;  gemifco 

Et,  mea  quce  dulcis podna  eji,  mihifemper  oberrat. 
In  me  bella  gero  plenufque  do  lor  is  et  irce, 
Paxque  mihi  modica  ejl  Laurcefolius  in  vmbra. 

Oritur  ex  vno  claro  mihifonte  et  acerbum, 

Et  quod  dulcefapit;  quorum  depafcor  utroque: 
Vnica  meque  maiius  Icedit,  Icefoque  medetur, 

Martyriumque  meum  nullo  quia  limite  claufum  ejl, 
Mille  neces  pacior,  vitas  totidemque  refumo 
Quoque  die;  fuperejlque  mihi /pes  nulla  falutis. 


LXVII.  103 


A  man  fingiiler  for  his  learning,  and  magiflrate  of  no  fmall 
accoumpt,  vpon  llight  furuey  of  this  booke  of  pafsions,  eyther 
for  the  liking  he  had  to  the  Author,  or  for  his  owne  priuatc 
pleafure,  or  for  fome  good  he  conceyued  of  the  worke,  voutch- 
fafed  with  his  own  hand  to  fet  down  certaine  pofies  concerning 
the  fame :  Amongft  which,  this  was  one.  Lone  hath  no  leaden 
heelcs.  Whereat  the  Author  glaunceth  throughout  al  this 
Sonnet ;  which  he  purpofcly  compylal  at  the  preffe,  in  remem- 
l  ranee  of  his  worlhipfull  frend,  and  in  honour  of  his  golden 
pofie. 


[\T)7'Hen  Cupid  is  content  to  keepe  the  flcies, 
7T\T  He  neuer  takes  delight  in  (landing  flill, 

But  too  and  froe,  and  eu'ry  where  he  flies, 
And  eu'ry  God  fubdueth  at  his  will, 

As  if  his  boaw  were  like  to  Fortunes  wheele, 
Him  felfe  like  her,  hauing  no  leaden  heele. 
AVTien  other  whiles  he  paffeth  Lem?ios  He, 
Vnhappy  boy  he  gybes  the  ^  Clubfooie  Sj?iith, 
Who  threatens  him,  and  bids  him  flay  a  while, 
But  laughing  out  he  leaues  him  he  forthwith. 

And  makes  him  felfe  companion  with  the  VVinde 
To  fhew,  his  heeles  are  of  no  leaden  kinde. 
But  in  my  felfe  I  haue  too  trewe  a  proofe : 
For  when  he  firfl  efpyde  my  raunging  Hearty 
He  Falcon  like  came  fowfmg  from  aloofe, 
His  fwiftly  falling  flroake  encreafl  my  fmart : 
As  yet  my  Heart  the  violence  it  feeles. 
Which  makes  me  fiy,  Loue  hath  ?io  leaden  heeles. 

1  Vulcan. 


I04 


LXVIII. 


*j 


The  Author  hath  wrought  this  pafsion  out  of  certaine  verfes  of 
Stephanus  Forcatulus,  which  are  thefe. 

Cor  mihi  punxit  amor,  fed punxit  prcBpete  telo  ; 

fi^tur  hoc  turn  plus,  cum  m.agis  excutio.  etc. 
Carpere  didtamum  Cretcea  nil  iuuet  Ida, 

quo  vellunt  cerui  fpicula  fixa  leues. 
Telephus  hcec  eadem  fatalia  vulnera  fenfct, 

fanare  vt  tantum,  quifacit  ilia,  queat. 

And  whereas  the  Author  in  the  end  of  this  pafsion,  alh^^eth  to 
the  woundes  of  Telephus,  he  is  to  be  vnderfloode  of  that  Tele- 
phus, the  Sonne  of  Hercules,  of  whofe  wound e,  being  made  and 
healed  by  Achilles  onely,  Oiiid  writeth  thus. 

Vulnus  Achillceo  quod  quondaffifecerat  hojli, 
Vulneris  auxilium  Pelias  hajla  tulii 

And  Propertius  in  like  manner  lib.  2. 

My/us  et  Ilcemonia  iuuenis  qui  cufpide  vulnus 
Senferat,  hac  ipfa  cufpide  fenfit  opem. 

Suidas  mentioneth  an  other  Telephus^  an  excellent  Grammarian 
of  Pergamus. 


De  remed. 
lib.  I. 


i 


I J  N  fecrete  feate  and  centre  of  my  heart  e, 
Vnwares  to  me,  not  once  fufpecting  ill, 
Blinde  Cupides  hand  hath  fixt  a  deadly  dart. 
Whereat  how  ere  I  plucke,  it  flicketh  ftill, 
And  workes  effect  Hke  thofe  of  Arab  foyle, 
Whofe  heades  are  dipt  in  poyfon  fLeed  of  oyle. 
If 't  were  Hke  thofe,  wherewith  in  Ida  plain  e 
The  CrcEtan  hunter  woundes  the  chafed  deere, 
I  could  with  Di^ame  drawe  it  out  againe, 
And  cure  me  fo,  that  fkarre  fhould  fcarce  appeare : 
•^  Or  if  Alcides  fhaft  did  make  me  bleed, 
Machaons  art  would  fland  me  in  fome  ileede. 
But  being,  as  it  is,  I  muft  compare 
With  iatall  woundes  of  Telephus  alone. 
And  fay,  that  he,  whofe  hand  hath  wrought  my  care, 
Mufl  eyther  cure  my  fatall  wounde,  or  none : 

Helpe  therefore  gentle  Loue  to  eafe  my  heart, 
Whofe  paines  encreafe,  till  thou  withdraw  thy  dart. 

1  He  alludeth  to  the  wound  of  Philoctetes. 


LXIX.  105 


In  the  firfl  flafTe  of  this  Paflion,  The  Authour  as  one  more  then 
halfe  dro\\-ping  with  defpaire,  forrowfully  recounteth  fome  par- 
ticular caufes  of  his  vnhappinelTe  in  Loue.  In  the  refidue,  he 
entreatclh  a  better  afpecte  of  the  Planets,  to  the  end,  that 
either  his  life  may  bee  inclined  to  a  more  happie  courfe,  or  his 
death  be  hallned,  to  end  all  his  mifery  at  once. 


Y  ioyes  are  donne,  my  comfort  quite  difmay'd, 
My  wear}^  wittes  bewtch't  with  wanton  will, 
My  \nll  by  Fancies  heedeles  faulte  betrayd, 
Whofe  eyes  on  Beauties  face  are  fixed  flill, 
And  whofe  conceyte  Folly  hath  clouded  foe, 
That  Loue  concludes,  viy  heart  mujlliuein  woe. 
But  change  afpect  ye  angry  flarres  aboue, 
And  po\\TS  diuine  redore  my  liberty, 
Or  graunte  that  foone  I  may  enioye  my  Loue^ 
Before  my  life  incurre  more  mifery  : 

For  nowe  fo  hotte  is  each  affault  I  feele 
As  would  diffolue  a  heart  more  harde  then  (leele. 
Or  if  you  needes  mufl  worke  my  deadly  fmart, 
Performe  your  charge  by  hafling  on  my  death 
In  fight  of  her,  whofe  eyes  enthrall  my  heart  : 
Both  life  and  death  to  her  I  doe  bequeath, 
In  hope  at  lafl,  fhe  will  voutfafe  to  fay, 
/  reive  his  deaths  whofe  life  I  made  atvay. 


io6 


LXX. 


Erotopsegni- 
con.  lib.  I. 


In  this  pafsion  the  Authour  fome  what  a  farre  off  imitateth  an 
Ode  in  Gervafius  Sepinus  written  to  Cupid,  where  hee  beginneth 
thus  : 

Quid  tenelle puer,  Pharetra  vbinam  ejl? 

Vbi  arcus  refer  ens  acuta  Lunce 

Bina  cornua  ?  vbi  flagrans  Amoris 

fax  ?  vbi  igneus  ille  arcus,  in  quo 

De  ipfis  Ccelicolis,  virifque  vidlis 

Vincfiifque  ante  ingum  aureus  triumphas  ? 

Haud poffent  tuafumma  numina  vnam, 

Vnam  vincere  Virginem  tenellani  ? 

Qui  fortes  animos  pudicce  Elifce 

Fortioribus  irrigans  venenis 

Vicifii :  etc. 


tVpid,  where  is  thy  golden  qmuer  nowe  ? 
Where  is  thy  flurdy  Bowe  ?  and  where  the  fire, 
Which  made  ere  this  the  Gods  themfelues  to  bow? 
Shall  fhe  alone,  which  forceth  my  Defire, 
Report  or  thinke  thy  Godhead  is  fo  finall, 
That  fhe  through  pride  can  fcape  from  being 
Whilom  thou  ouercam'fl  the  ftately  minde  [thrall? 

Of  chaft  Euja  queene  of  Carthage  land, 
And  did'ft  conflraine  Pafiphae  gainft  her  kind. 
And  broughtefl  Europa  faire  to  Cretafande, 

Quite  through  the  fwelling  Seas,  to  pleafure  loue, 
Whofe  heau'nly  heart  was  touch't  with  mortall  loue. 
Thus  wert  thou  wunt  to  fhewe  thy  force  and  flight, 
By  conqu'ring  thofe  that  were  of  higheft  race, 
Where  nowe  it  feemes  thou  changeft  thy  delight, 
Permitting  ftill,  to  thy  no  fmall  difgrace, 
A  virgin  to  defpife  thy  felfe,  and  me, 
Whofe  heart  is  hers,  where  ere  my  body  be. 


LXXI.  107 


The  Authour  wriicth  this  Sonnet  vnto  his  veiy  friend,  in  excufe 
of  his  late  change  of  ftudy,  mannefs,  and  delights,  all  happen- 
ing through  the  default  of  Loue.  And  here  by  examples  he 
proueth  vnto  him,  (calling  him  by  the  name  of  Titus,  as  if  him 
felfe  were  Gyl'ippus)  that  Loue  not  onely  worketh  alteration  in 
the  mindes  of  men,  but  alfo  in  the  very  Gods  them  felues  ; 
and  that  fo  farre  forth,  as  firft  to  drawe  them  from  their 
Celefliall  feates  and  functions,  and  then  to  enfnare  them  with 
the  vnfeemely  defire  of  mortall  creatures,  a  Pafsion  ill  befitting 
the  maiefty  of  their  Godheads. 


^  Las  deere  Tiitis  mine,  my  auncient  frend, 
WTiat  makes  thee  mufe  at  this  my  prefent  pHght, 
To  fee  my  woonted  ioyes  enioy  their  end 
And  how  my  Mufe  hath  lofl  her  old  deHght  ? 
„   This  is  the  leajl  effeH.  of  Cupids  dart, 
,,  To  cha?ige  the  viinde  by  woufiding  of  \h.Q  heart. 
Alcides  fell  in  loue  as  I  haue  done, 
And  layd  afide  both  club  and  Lions  fkinne  : 
Achilles  too  when  he  faire  Bryfes  wimne, 
To  fall  from  wanes  to  wooing  did  beginne. 
Nay,  if  thou  lift,  furuey  the  heau'ns  aboue. 
And  fee  how  Gods  them  felues  are  chang'd  hy  Loue. 
loue  fteales  from  fkies  to  lye  by  Loedaes  fide  ; 
Areas  defcendes  for  faire  Aglaurus  fake. 
And  Solj  fo  foone  as  Daphne  is  efpied, 
To  followe  her  his  Chariot  doth  forfake  : 

No  meruaile  then  although  I  change  my  minde, 
Which  am  in  loue  with  one  of  heau'nly  kinde. 


io8  LXXII. 


In  this  Sonnet  The  Authour  feemeth  to  fpecifie,  that  his  Beloued 
maketh  her  aboade  in  this  our  beautifull  and  faire  Citty  of 
London  ;  fituate  vpon  the  fide  of  the  Themfe,  called  in  latine 
Thamefis.  And  therefore,  whilft  he  faineth,  that  Thamefis  is 
honourably  to  be  conueyed  hence  by  all  the  Gods,  towardes 
the  Palace  of  old  N'ereus,  he  feemeth  to  growe  into  fome 
iealofie  of  his  miflres,  whofe  beautie  if  it  were  as  well  known 
to  them,  as  it  is  to  him,  it  would  (as  he  faith)  both  defenie  more 
to  be  honoured  by  them,  and  pleafe  Tryton  much  better,  then 
Thamefis,  although  fhe  be  the  fairefl  daughter  of  old  Oceanus. 


m> 


Ceanus  not  long  agoe  decreed 
)To  wedd  his  deareft  daughter  Thainefts 
To  Tryton  Neptu7tes  fonne,and  that  with  fpeede: 
When  Neptune  fawe  the  match  was  not  amiffe, 
Hee  prayde  the  Gods  from  highefl  to  the  lead, 
With  him  to  celebrate  the  Nuptiall  feafl. 
Loue  did  defcend  with  all  his  heau'nly  trayne, 
And  came  for  Thamefis  to  London  fide, 
In  whofe  conduct  each  one  imployd  his  paine 
To  reuerence  the  flate  of  fuch  a  Bride : 

But  whilfl  I  fawe  her  led  to  Nereus  Hall, 
My  iealous  heart  begann  to  throbb  withalL 
I  doubted  I,  left  any  of  that  crewe, 
In  fetching  Thamefis^  fhou[l]d  fee  my  Loue, 
Whofe  tifmg  face  is  of  more  liuely  hewe, 
Then  any  Saintes  in  earth,  or  heau'n  aboue  : 
Befides,  I  fear'd,  that  Tryton  would  defire 
My  Loue^  and  let  his  Thamefis  retyre. 


LXXIII.  109 


Here  the  Author,  by  faining  a  quarrell  betwixt  Loue  and  his 
Heart,  vnder  a  fhadow  exprelTeth  the  tyrannic  of  the  one, 
and  the  miferie  of  the  other  :  to  flurre  vp  a  iufl  hatred  of  the 
ones  iniuflice,  and  caufe  due  compafsion  of  the  others  \Tihap- 
pines.  But  as  he  accufeth  Loue  for  his  readines  to  hurt,  where 
he  may ;  fo  he  not  excufeth  his  Heart,  for  defiring  a  faire  im- 
prifonment,  when  he  neded  not  :  thereby  fpecifying  in  Loue  a 
wilfull  mahce,  in  his  Heart  a  heedleffe  follie. 


Rue  to  thinke  vpon  the  difmall  day 
When  Cupid  firfl  proclamed  open  vvarre 
Again fl  my  Heart e ;  which  fledde  without  delay, 
But  when  he  thought  from  Loue  to  be  mod  farre, 
The  winged  boy  preuented  him  by  flight, 
And  led  him  captiuelyke  from  all  delight. 
The  time  of  triumph  being  ouerpaft, 
He  fcarcely  knewe  where  to  beflowe  the  fpoile, 
Till  through  my  heedlefle  Heartes  defire,  at  lafl, 
He  lockt  him  vp  in  Tower  of  endleffe  toyle, 

Within  her  brefl,  whofe  hardned  wil  doth  vexe 
Her  filly  ghefl.  fofter  then  liquid  wex. 
This  prifon  at  the  firfl  did  pleafe  him  well, 
And  feem'd  to  be  fome  earthly  Faradife^ 
Where  now  (alas)  Experience  doth  tell, 
That  Beawties  bates  can  make  the  fimple  wife, 

And  biddes  him  blame  the  bird,  that  willingly 
Choafeth  a  golden  cage  for  liberty. 


no  LXXIIII. 


The  Author  in  this  pafsion,  vpon  a  reafon  fecret  vnto  him  felfe, 
extolleth  his  Miflres  vnder  the  name  of  a  Spring.  Firft  he 
preferreth  the  fame  before  the  facred  fount  of  Diana,  which  (as 
Quid  witnefleth  3.  Metam  :)  was  in  the  valley  Gargaphie, 
adioyning  to  Thoebes  :  then,  before  Tagus  the  famous  riuer  in 
Spaine,  whofe  fandes  are  intermixt  with  ftoare  of  gold,  as  may 
be  gathered  by  thofe  two  verfes  in  Martiall  lib.  8. 
Non  illifatis  ejl  turbato  fordidus  aiiro 

Hennus,  et  Hefperio  quifonat  orbe  Tagus. 

And  laflly,  before  Hippocrene,  a  fountaine  of  Bceotia,  now  called 
the  well  of  the  Miifes,  and  fained  by  the  Poets,  to  haue  had  his 
fource  or  beginning  from  the  heele  of  Pegafus  the  winged  horfe. 


yAcLthough  the  droppes,  which  chaung'd   A^ceons 
(|5l^  Were  halfe  diuine,  and  from  a  facred  fount;  [fhape, 
Though  after  Tagus  fandes  the  world  do  gape; 
And  Hippocrene  fland  in  high  account : 

Yet  ther's  a  Spring.,  whofe  vertue  doth  excell 
Dianaes  fount,  Tagus.,  and  Pegafe  well. 
That  happie  how'r,  wherein  I  found  it  furft, 
And  fat  me  downe  adioyning  to  the  brinke, 
My  fowe  it  felfe,  fupprif'd  with  vnknow'n  thurft, 
Did  wifh  it  lawfuU  were  thereof  to  drinke ; 

But  all  in  vaine  :  for  Loue  did  will  me  flay 
And  waite  a  while  in  hope  of  fuch  a  pray. 
This  is  that  Spring  quoth  he,  where  Ne^ar  flowes, 
Whofe  liquor  is  of  price  in  heaun's  aboue  ; 
This  is  the  Spring.,  wherein  fweet  Venus  fhowes. 
By  fecrete  baite  how  Beautie  forceth  Loue. 

Why  then,  quoth  I,  deere  Loue  how  fhall  I  mend, 
Or  quench  my  thurft,  vnleffe  thou  fland  my  frend  ? 


LXXV.  Ill 


In  this  pafsion  the  Authour  boroweth  from  certaine  Latine  verfes 
of  his  owne,  made  long  agoe  vpon  tlie  loue  abufes  of  Iiippiter 
in  a  certaine  peece  of  worke  written  in  the  commendation  of 
women  kinde  ;  which  he  hath  not  yet  whohe  perfecfled  to  the 
print.  Some  of  the  verfes  may  be  thus  cited  to  the  explaining 
of  this  pafsion,  although  but  lamelie. 

Accipe  vt  igjiiiram  caiidcntis  imagine  Taiiri 

Luferit  Eiifopam  Jicla  etc. 

Qiiam  iiimio  Scmelen  fuerit  complexits  amore.  etc. 

Qualis  et  AJlerien  aquilinis  prcj)crit  alis : 

Qiioque  dolo  Lcedajn  fi(flo  fub  olore fefcUit. 

Adde  qubd  Antiopam  Satyrifub  imagijie  etc. 

Etfuit  Amphytrio,  ctim  te  Tirynihia  etc. 

yEginaqiie  duos  ignis  fub  imagine  natos  etc. 

Parrhafiam  fidtce pharctra  Vultuqiie  DiancB, 

Miiemofynen  pajlor  ;  ferpens  Dedida  In/it.  etc. 
Ouid  writeth  fomewhat  in  like  manner.     Metam,  lib.  6. 


'Ot  fhe,  whom  lotie  tranfported  into  Crete  \ 
jI^InNof  Scmek,  to  whom  he  vow'd  in  haft  ; 
^"^Nor  fhe,  whofe  flanckes  he  fild  with  fayned  heate  ; 
Nor  whome  mth  yEgles  winges  he  oft  embrafl ; 
Nor  Da?iae,  beguyl'd  by  golden  rape  ; 
Nor  fhe,  for  whome  he  tooke  Dianaes  fhape  ; 
Nor  faire  Antiopa,  whofe  fruitefull  loue 
He  gayned  Satyr  like  ;  nor  fhe,  whofe  Sonne 
To  wanton  Htbe  was  conioyn'd  aboue  ; 
Nor  fweete  Miiemofy?ie.,  whofe  loue  he  wunne 

In  fhepheardes  weede  ;  no  fuch  are  like  the  SaiJit^ 
Whofe  eyes  enforce  my  feeble  heart  to  faint. 
And  lotie  him  felfe  may  florme,  if  fo  he  pleafe. 
To  heare  me  thus  compare  my  Loue  with  his  : 
No  forked  fire,  nor  thunder  can  difeafe 
This  heart  of  mine,  where  Rronger  torment  is  : 
But  O  how  this  furpaffeth  all  the  refl. 
That  (he,  which  hurtes  me  mofl,  I  loue  her  befl. 


112  LXXVI, 


In  this  Sonnet  the  Author  being,  as  it  were,  in  halfe  a  madding 
moode,  falleth  at  variance  with  Loue  himfelfe,  and  blafphemeth 
his  godheade,  as  one  that  can  make  a  greater  wounde,  then 
afterwardes  he  him  felfe  can  recure.  And  the  chiefe  caufe 
that  he  fetteth  downe,  why  he  is  no  longer  to  hope  for  helpe  at 
Loues  hande,  is  this,  becaufe  he  him  felfe  could  not  remedie 
the  hurt  which  he  fufteyned  by  the  loue  of  faire  Pfyches?- 


fHou  foolifh  God  the  Author  of  my  griefe, 
^  „^  If  Pfyches  beames  could  fet  thy  heart  on  fire, 
How  can  I  hope,  of  thee  to  haue  reHefe, 
Whofe  minde  with  mine  doth  fuffer  Hke  defire  ? 
Henceforth  my  heart  fhall  facrifice  elfwhere 
To  fuch  a  Sainte  as  higher  porte  doth  beare. 
And  fuch  a  Saint  is  Ihe,  whom  I  adore, 
As  foyles  thy  force,  and  makes  thee  ftand  aloofe  ; 
None  els,  but  fhe,  can  falue  my  feflred  foare  3 
And  Ihe  alone  will  ferue  in  my  behoofe : 

Then  blinded  boye,  goe  packe  thee  hence  away, 
And  thou  Sweet  Souk,  giue  eare  to  what  I  fay. 
And  yet  what  fhall  I  fay  ?  flraunge  is  my  cafe, 
In  mid'll  of  froafl  to  burne,  and  freze  in  flame  : 
Would  Gods  I  neuer  had  beheld  thy  face, 
Or  els,  that  once  I  might  poffeffe  the  fame  : 

Or  els  that  chaunce  would  make  me  free  againe, 
Whofe  hand  helpt  Loue  to  bring  me  to  this  paine. 

1  Vide  Apul. 


LXXVII.  113 


The  chiefe  contentes  of  this  Pafsion  are  taken  out  of  Seraphixe 
Sonnet^  132. 

Col  tempo  pajfa  gli  afini,  i  tne/i,  e  Vkore^ 
Col  tempo  le  7-icheze,  imperio,  e  regno, 
Col  tempo  fama,  honor,  fortezza,  e  iugegno. 
Col  tempo  gionentn  con  bclta  viare  etc. 
But    this    Authour    inuerteth    the    order,    which    Seraphhte 
vfeth,   fome    times   for  his    rimes  fake,    but    for   the  moft 
part,  vpon  fome  other  more  allowable  confideration. 


tl^Ime  wafleth  yeeres,  and  month's,  and  howr's: 
^^  Time  doth  confume  fame,  honour,  witt  and  flrength : 
Timekills  the  greenefl  Herbes  andfweeteftflowr's  : 
Time  weares  out  youth  and  beauties  lookes  at  length: 
Time  doth  conuey  to  ground  both  foe  and  friend, 
And  each  thing  els  but  Loue,  which  hath  no  end. 
Time  maketh  eu'ry  tree  to  die  and  rott : 
Time  turneth  ofte  our  pleafures  into  paine  : 
Time  caufeth  warres  and  wronges  to  be  forgott  : 
Time  cleares  the  (kie,  which  firfl  hung  full  of  rayne : 
Time  makes  an  end  of  all  humane  defire. 
But  onely  this,  which  fettes  my  heart  on  fire. 
Time  turneth  into  naught  each  Princely  flate  : 
Time  brings  a  fludd  from  newe  refolued  fnowe  : 
Time  calmes  the  Sea  where  tempefl  was  of  late  : 
Time  eates  what  ere  the  Moone  can  fee  belowe  : 
And  yet  no  time  preuailes  in  my  behoue, 
Nor  any  time  can  make  me  ceafc  to  loue. 

H 


114  LXXVIII. 


This  Pafsion  concemeth  the  lowring  of  his  Miflres  and   here- 
in   for    the     moft     part     the     Authour     imitateth     Agnola 
jirenzuola  ;  who  vpon  tiie  Hke  fubiedl,  writeth  as  folio weth, 
O  belle  donne,  prendam  pietade 
Di  me  pur  Jiorin  talpa  trafformato 
D'Jmom,  che p7ir  dianza  ardiua  mirar fifo 
Come  Aqiiila  ilfol  chiar  in  paradifo. 
Co/i  vcCl  mondo,  e  cqft/pejfo  accade  . 
A  chifi  fidu  iiiamorofo Jiato,  etc. 


Hat  fcowling  cloudes  haue  ouercafl  the  fkie, 


^'\if  o^/f  ■"■      K-OWiiiig  ciuuues  naue  uuercait  trie  iK.ie, 
d^^  jE^>  That  thefe  mine  eies  can  not,  as  woonte  they 
Beholde  their  fecond  Sunne  intentiuely  ?  [were, 

Some  flrange  Eclipfe  is  hap'ned  as  I  feare, 

Whereby  my  Simiie  is  either  bard  of  light, 
Or  I  my  felfe  haue  lofl  my  feeing  quite. 
Mofl  hkely  foe,  fmce  Loice  him  felfe  is  blinde. 
And  Venus  too  (perhaps)  will  haue  it  fo, 
That  Louers  wanting  fight  fhall  foUowe  kinde. 
O  then  faire  Dames  bewaile  my  prefent  woe, 

Which  thus  ammadeamoale,andblindefolderunne 
Where  ^gle  like  I  late  beheld  the  Siinne. 
But  out  alas,  fuch  guerdon  is  affignde 
To  all  that  loue  and  followe  Cupids  carre : 
lie  tyres  their  limmes  and  doth  bewitch  their  minde. 
And  makes  within  them  felues  a  lafting  warre. 
Reafon  with  much  adoe  doth  teach  me  this. 
Though  yet  I  cannot  mend  what  is  a  miffe. 


LXXIX.  115 


The  Au[t]hour  in  lliis  Palsion  feemelh  vppon  miflikc  of  his  wcaii- 

fome  eftate  in  loue  to  enter  into  a  deepe  difcourfe  with  him 

felfe   touching   the  particular  miferies  which  befall  him  that 

loueth.     And  for  his  fenfe  in  this  place,  hee  is  very  like  vnto 

him  felfe,  where  in  a  Theame  diducled  out  of  the  bowelles  of 

Antigone  in  Sophocles  (which  he  lately  tranflated  into  Latine, 

and   publifhed  in  print)  he  writeth  in  very  like  manner  as 

followeth.  ,  .  ,.  7    /-    .  •  7-    • 

iMali  qnanao  Lnpiduiis 

Venas  crjlus  edax  occiipat  indmas, 

Artes  iugeniutn  lahitnr  in  inalas  ; 

laclatur  varit!,  nee  Cereris  fnbit 

Nee  Baeehi  ttdium  ;  pernigiles  trahit 

No<fles  ;  eura  aniwiim  foUicita  atierit,  etc. 

And  it  may  appeare  by  the  tenour  of  this  Pafsion  that  the  Authour 

preparcth  him  felfe  to  fall  from  Loue  and  all  his  lawes  as  will 

well  appeare  by  the  fequell  of  his  other  Pafsions  that  followe, 

which  are  all  made  vpon  this  Pofie,  My  Lone  is  paji. 

.,  Here   heate  of  loue  doth  once  poffeffe  the 
J^  heart,  „ 

^^  There  cares  oppreffe  the  minde  with  wondrous 


ill, 

Wit  runns  awrj^e  not  fearing  future  finarte,  „ 

And  fond  defire  doth  ouermafler  will :  ,, 

The  belly  neither  cares  for  meate  nor  drinke,  ,, 

Nor  ouerwatched  eyes  defire  to  winke  :  ,, 

Footcjleps  are  falfe,  and  waur'ing  too  and  froe  ;  ,, 

The  brightfome  flowW  of  beauty  fades  away  :  ,, 

Reafon  retyres,  2ind  pleafure  brings  in  woe  :  „ 

And  wifedofne  yeldeth  place  to  black  decay  :  ,, 

Coim/ell,  a.nd  fame,  2.T\(i  friendJJiip  are  contem'nd:  „ 

And  bafl:ifull_/7/<^7W(?,  and  G^^^/j- them  feluescondem'nd.  „ 

Watchfuliy}//^^<^  is  linked  with  defpaire-.  „ 

Inconflant  hope  is  often  drown'd  in  feares  :  „ 

V^\\2i\.  folly  hurtes  r\otfortime  can  repayre  ;  ,, 

And  7?iifery  doth  fwimme  in  Seas  of  teares  :  ,. 

Long  vfe  of  life  is  but  a  lingring  foe,  „ 

And  gentle  death  is  only  end  of  woe.  „ 


,i6  LXXX. 

MY  LOVE   IS   PAST. 

yyixLL  fuch  as  are  but  of  indifferent  capacitie,  and 
Jj\  haue  fome  fkill  in  Arithmetike,  by  viewing  this 
''^rCcT)  Sonnet  following  compiled  by  rule  and  number, 
into  the  forme  of  a  piller,  may  foone  iudge,  howe 
much  art  and  fludy  the  Author  hath  beftowed  in  the 
fame.  Wheiein  as  there  are  placed  many  preaty  ob- 
feruations,  fo  thefe  which  I  will  fet  downe,  may  be 
marked  for  the  principall,  if  any  man  haue  fuch  idle 
leafure  to  looke  it  ouer,  as  the  Authour  had,  when  he 

1  framed  it.  Firft  therfore  it  is  to  be  noted,  that  the 
whole  piller  (except  the  bafis  or  foote  thereof)  is  by 
relation  of  either  half e  to  the  other  Antitheticall  or 

2  AntifiUabicall.  Secondly,  how  this  pofie  {Amare 
eft  infaiiire)  runneth  twyfe  through  out  ye  Columne, 
if  ye  gather  but  the  firll  letter  of  euery  whole  verfe 
orderly  (excepting  the  two  lafL)  and  then  in  like 
manner  take  but  the  lafl  letter  of  euery  one  of  the  faid 

3  verfes,  as  they  fland.  Thirdly  is  to  bee  obferued,  that 
euery  verfe,  but  the  two  lafl,  doth  end  with  the  fame 
letter  it  beginneth,  and  yet  through  out  the  whole  a 
true  rime  is  perfectly  obferued,  although  not  after  our 

4  accuftomed  manner.  Fourthly,  that  the  foote  of  the 
piller  is  Orchematicall,  yat  is  to  fay,  founded  by  tranfi- 
lition  or  ouer  fkipping  of  number  by  rule  and  order, 
as  from  i  to  3,  5,  7,  and  9  ;  the  fecret  vertue 
whereof  may  be  learned  in  ^  Trithemius^  as  namely 
by  tables  of  tranfilition  to  decypher  any  thing  that 
is  written  by  fecret  tranfpofition  of  letters,  bee  it 

5  neuer  fo  cunningly  conueighed.  And  laflly,  this 
obferuation  is  not  to  be  neglected,  that  when  all  the 
forefaide  particulars  as  performed,  the  whole  piller 
is  but  iufl  18  verfes,  as  will  appeare  in  the  page 
following  it.  Per  modiim  expaiifionis, 

1  Polygraphise  suae,  lib.  5. 


LXXXI.  117 

MY    LOVE    IS    PAST. 
A    Pafquine  Filler  creHcd  in   tlie  despite  of  Lone. 

I       At 
A     2     lafl,  though 

3     late,       farewell 
4     olde     well     a     da  :     A 
m     5     Mirth  or  mifchaiice  flrike 
a     6     vp     a     newe     alarM,     And     m 
7     Cy  p  ria  la  fiemi  c  a 

r       8     iniA       Retire      to      Cyprus     lie,      a 
e      9     and  ceafe  thy  waRR,  Els  mull  thou  proue  how     r 
E     10     Reafon   can  by  charmE   Enforce  to  flight  thy     e 

S     II     blindfolde  bratte  and  thee.  So  frames  it  with  mee  now,     E 

s 

t     12     that   I    confefS,    The    life    I    ledde   in    Lone    deuoyde     ^ 

I     12     of  relT,   It  was  a   Hell,  where  none  felte  more  than  I,     I 
^       1 1     Nor    anye    with    lyke     miferies    forlorN.        Since     n 
a      10    therefore  now  my  woes  are  wexed   lefS,   And     s 
9     Reafoii     bidds      mee  leaue    olde  welladA,     a 
n     8     No  longer  fliall  the  worlde  laugh  mee 
i      7     to  fcorN  ;  I'le  choofe  a  path  that     n 
r    6     fhall  not    leade  awrie.    Reft    i 
5     then  with  mee  from  your 

4     blinde   Cupids  carR     r 
e.     3     Each     one     of 
2     you,      that 
I     ferue, 
3     and   would  be 
5     freE.    H'is  dooble  thrall      e. 
7     that  liu's  as  Loue  thinks  beft,  whofe 
9     hande  ftill   Tyrant   like  to  hurte   is   prefte,^ 

1  Huius  Columnae  Basis,  pro  silla-     barum  numero  et  linearum  proportione 

est  Orchematica. 


ii8  LXXXIL 

MY   LOVE   IS    PAST. 
Expanjio  CoImmucb  prcecedentis. 

A     At  laft,  though  late,  farewell  olde  wellada  ;  A 

m     Mirth  for  mifchaunce  flrike  vp  a  newe  alarm  ;  m 

a      And  Ciprya  la  nemica  mia  a 

r      Retyre  to  Cyprus  He  and  ceafe  thy  warr,  r 

e      Els  muft  thou  proue  how  Reafon  can  by  charme  e 

E     Enforce  to  flight  thy  blyndfold  bratte  and  thee.  E 

s      So  frames  it  with  me  now,  that  I  confeff  s 

t      The  life  I  ledde  in  Loue  deuoyd  of  reft  t 

I      It  was  a  Hell,  where  none  felt  more  then  I,  I 

n      Nor  any  with  like  miferies  forlorn.  n 

s      Since  therefore  now  my  woes  are  wexed  leff,  s 

a      And  Reafon  bids  me  leaue  olde  wellada,  a 

n      No  longer  ftiall  the  world  laugh  me  to  fcorn  :  n 

i       I'le  choofe  a  path  that  (hall  not  leade  awri.  i 

r      Reft  then  with  me  from  your  blinde  Cupids  carr  r 

e  Each  one  of  you,  that  feme  and  would  be  free,  e 
1  H'is  double  thrall  that  liu's  as  Loue  thinks  beft 
Whofe  hand  ftill  Tyrant  like  to  hurt  is  preft, 


1  ToV  TOi  Ti!ipavvoP  €V(Tej3e7v,  q{)  pq-biov.     Sophoc.  in  Aia.  flagell. 


LXXXllI.  119 


MY    LOVE    IS    PAST. 

In     this     Sonnet    the    Author    hath     imitated     one    of  Ron- 
/aides  *  Odes  ;  which  beginneth  thus 
Les  Mii/es  liercut  vn  ioiir 

De chaifnes  de  rofes  Amour,  *  An  Ihire de 

Etpoiir  legarder,  le  donnerent  ^^^  ineslang^s. 

Axis  Graces  et  h  la  Bcaiiti  : 
Qui  voyajis  fa  deJloyauQ, 
Siis  Parnafe  Veuiprisojuio  cut.  etc. 


fHe  Mufes  not  long  fmce  intrapping  Lone 
-,^  In  chaines  of  roafes  linked  all  araye, 

Gaue  Beawtie  charge  to  watch  in  theire  behoue 
With  Graces  three,  left  he  fhould  wend  awaye  : 
Who  fearing  yet  he  would  efcape  at  laft, 
On  high  Paniajfiis  toppe  they  clapt  him  faft. 
When  Veims  vnderftoode  her  Sonne  was  thrall, 
She  made  pofthafte  to  haue  God  Vidcans  ayde, 
Solde  him  her  Getnmes^  and  Cejlon  therewithall,i 
To  ranfome  home  her  Sonne  that  was  betraide ; 
But  all  in  vaine,  the  Mtifes  made  no  ftoare 
Of  gold,  but  bound  him  fafter  then  before. 
Therefore  all  you,  whom  Lone  did  ere  abufe, 
Come  clappe  your  handes  with  me,  to  fee  him  thrall, 
AVTiofe  former  deedes  no  reafon  can  excufe. 
For  killing  thofe,  which  hurt  him  not  at  all : 
My  felfe  by  him  was  lately  led  awrye, 
Though  now  at  laft  I  force  my  loue  to  dye. 

1  Vt  M.-irtis  reuocctur  amor,  summique  Tonantis, 

A  te  luno  petat  Ccston,  et  ipsa  Venus.     Martialis. 


I20  LXXXIIII. 


MY   LOVE   IS    PAST. 

The  Authour  in  this  Sonnet  expreffeth  his  mallice  towardes 
Venus  and  her  Sonne  Cupid,  by  currying  fauour  with 
Diana,  and  by  fuing  to  haue  the  felfe  fame  office  in 
her  walkes  and  forreft,  which  fometimes  her  chafl  and 
befl  beloued  Hippolitus  enioyed.  Which  Hippolitus  (as 
Se7'uius  witneffeth)  dyed  by  the  falfe  deceipt  of  his 
Stepmother  Phcedra,  for  not  yeelding  ouer  himfelfe 
vnto  her  inceftuous  loue ;  whereuppon  Seneca  writeth  thus, 

hnienifqne  cajius  crimine  incejia  iace^, 
JPudicus,  infons. 


^^laiia^  fmce  Hippolytus  is  deade, 
f^T^Let  me  enioy  thy  fauour,  and  his  place  :    [fleade, 
My  might  through  will  fhall  Hand  thee  in  fome 
To  driue  blinde  Loue  and  Venus  from  thy  chafe  : 
For  where  they  lately  wrought  me  mickle  woe, 
I  vow  me  no  we  to  be  theire  mortall  foe. 
And  doe  thou  not  miflrufl  my  chafletie. 
When  I  fhall  raunge  amidfl  thy  virgine  traine  : 
My  raynes  are  chaflned  fo  through  miferie. 
That  Loue  with  me  can  nere  preuaile  againe  : 
,,       The  childe,  whofe  finger  once  hath  felt  the  fire, 
,,       To  playe  therewith  will  haue  but  fmale  defire. 
Befides,  I  vow  to  beare  a  watchful  eye, 
Difcou'ring  fuch,  as  paffe  along  thy  groue ; 
If  Luppiter  him  felfe  come  loytring  by. 
He  call  thy  crew ;  and  bid  them  fly  from  Loue ; 
For  if  they  fl.ay,  he  will  obtaine  at  lafl:. 
What  now  I  loathe,  becaufe  my  loue  is  pafl. 


LXXXV.  121 


MY   LOVE    IS    PAST. 

The  chiefefl  fubflance  of  this  Sonnet  is  borrowed  out  of  cer- 
teine  Latin  vorfes  of  Strozza  a  noble  man  of  Jtaly^  and  one  ol 
the  beft  Poets  in  all  his  age  :  who  in  defcribing  Metaphori- 
cally to  his  friend  Aiitotiius  the  true  forme  of  his  amorous 
eftate,  writeth  thus  : 

Vnda  hie  funt  Lachrima,  Ventifupirice,  Remi 
Votiiy  Error  velum.  Mens  77iah[faiia  Kalis  ; 
Spes  Temo,  Cnroe  Comites,  Conjiaiitia  A  maris 
EJl  mains.  Dolor  ejl  Anehora,  N'auila  Amor,  etc. 


«!3p  He  fouldiar  wome  with  warres,  delightes  in  peace ; 
i-^The  pilgrime  in  his  eafe,  when  toyles  are  pafl ; 
The  fhip  to gayne  the  porte,  when  flormes  doe  ceafe ; 
And  I  reioyce,  from  Loue  difcharg'd  at  lafl ; 
Whome  while  I  feru'd,  peace,  refl,  and  land  I  lofl, 
With  grieufome  wars,  with  toyles,  with  florms  betofl. 
Sweete  liberty  nowe  giues  me  leaue  to  fmg, 
What  worlde  it  was,  where  Loue  the  rule  did  beare ; 
Howe  foolidi  Chawice  by  lottes  rul'd  euery  thing ; 
Howe  Error  was  viahie  faile ^  each  wane  a  Teare ;      ,, 
The  mafler,  Loue  him  felfe ;  diQQ^fighes  were  winde\ ,, 
Cares  rowd  with  vo7ves  the  (hip  vn7nery  minde.         ,, 
Falfe  hope  as  healme  oft  tum'd  the  boat  about ;  ,. 

Iiicoiijlant  faith  flood  vp  for  middle  majle  „ 

Dcfpaire  the  cable  twilled  all  with  Doubt  „ 

Held  Griping  Grief e  the  pyked  Anchor  fafl ;  „ 

Beautie  was  all  the  rockes.     But  I  at  lafl,  „ 

Am  now  twife  free,  and  all  my  loue  is  pafl.         „ 


122  LXXXVI. 


MY    LOVE    IS    PAST. 

The  fenfe  of  this  Sonnet  is  for  the  mofl  part  taken  out  of  a  letter, 
which  ^neas  Syluhis  wrote  vnto  his  friend,  to  perfuade  him, 
that  albeit  he  lately  had  publifhed  the  wanton  loue  of  Lucreiia 
and  Etcryalus,  yet  liee  liked  nothing  leffe  \h&n  inch,  fond  Loue  ; 
and  that  he  nowe  repented  him  of  his  owne  labour  ouer  idlely 
bellowed  in  defcribing  the  fame. 


L^'^Weete  liberty  reflores  my  woonted  ioy, 
)And  bids  me  tell,  how  painters  fet  to  viewe 
The  forme  of  Lone.     They  painte  him  but  a  Boy^ 
As  working  mofl  in  mindes  of  youthfull  crewe : 
They  fet  him  naked  all,  as  wanting  fhame 
To  keepe  his  fecret  partes  or  t'hide  the  fame. 
They  paint  him  blinde  in  that  he  cannot  fpy 
What  diffrence  is  twixt  vertue  and  default. 
With  Boe  in  haiid^  as  one  that  doth  defie, 
And  cumber  heedeleffe  heartes  with  fierce  affault : 
His  other  hand  doth  hold  a  brajid  of  fire. 
In  figne  of  heate  he  makes  through  hot  defire. 
They  giue  him  winges  to  flie  from  place  to  place, 
To  note  that  all  are  wau'ring  like  the  winde, 
Whofe  liberty  fond  Loue  doth  once  deface. 
This  forme  to  Loiie  old  paynters  haue  affignd ; 
Whofe  fond  effects  if  any  lift  to  proue. 
Where  I  make  end,  let  them  begin  to  Loue. 


L  XXX  VI  I.  123 


MY   LOVE    IS    PAST. 

The  Authour  in  the  firfte  flafie  of  this  Sonnet,  exprefTeth  how 
Loue  firfl  went  beyond  him,  by  perfuading  him  that  all  was 
golde  which  gliflered.  In  the  fecond,  hee  telleth,  how  time 
broughte  hym  to  tnieth,  and  Trueth  to  Reafon  :  by  whofegood 
counfellhe  found  the  way  from  worfe  to  better,  and  did  ouer- 
goe  the  malice  of  blincle  Fortune.  In  the  third  flaffe,  he 
craueth  pardon  at  euery  man  for  the  offences  of  his  youth  ;  and 
to  Loue,  the  onely  caufe  of  his  long  errour,  hee  geuetli  his 
vltimum  vale. 


^Outh  made  a  fault  through  hghtnes  of  Beleefe, 

^Vhich  fond  Beleefe  Lotce  placed  in  my  brefl : 

„       But  now  I  finde,  that  Reafon  giues  reliefe;  [befl; 

„       And  time  fhewes  Trueth,  and  Wit,  thats  bought,  is 

Mufe  not  therefore  although  I  chaunge  my  vaine, 
„  He  runnes  too  farre  which  neuer  tumes  againe. 
Henceforth  my  mind  Ihall  haue  a  watchfull  eye, 
lie  fcome  Fotid  Loue,  and  practife  of  the  fame  : 
The  wifedome  of  my  hart  fhall  foone  defcrie 
Each  thing  ihats  good,  from  what  deferueth  blame  : 
My  fong  fhalbe  ;  Fortune  hath  fpitte  her  fpight, 
And  Loice  can  hurt  no  more  withall  his  might. 
Therefore  all  you,  to  whome  my  courfe  is  knowne, 
Thinke  better  comes,  and  pardon  what  is  pafl : 
I  finde  that  all  my  wildefl  Gates  are  fowne, 
And  loy  to  fee,  what  now  I  fee  at  lafl ; 

And  fmce  that  Loue  was  caufe  I  trode  a  wry, 
I  hcere  take  off  his  Bels,  and  let  him  flie. 


124  LXXXVIIL 


MY   LOVE   IS    PAST. 

This  whole  Sonnet  is  nothing  els  but  a  briefe  and  pithy  moral!, 
and  made  after  the  felfe  fame  vaine  v/ith  that,  which  is  laft 
before  it.  The  two  firft  staffes,  (excepting  onely  the  two  fii-fl 
verfes  of  all)  expreffe  the  Authours  alteration  of  minde  and 
life,  and  his  change  from  his  late  vaine  eflate  and  follies  in 
loue,  by  a  metaphore  of  the  fhipman,  which  by  fhipwrakes 
chaunce  is  happely  refloared  on  a  fodeine  vnto  that  land,  which 
he  a  long  time  had  moft  wilhed  for. 


Long  maintayned  warre  gainll  Reafons  rule, 
I  wandred  pilgrime  like  in  Errors  maze, 
I  fat  in  Follies  fhip,  and  playde  the  foole, 
Till  on  Repentance  rocke  hir  fides  did  craze  : 
Herewith  I  learne  by  hurtes  alreadie  pafl, 
„  That  each  extreme  will  change  it  felfe  at  lafl. 

This  fhipwrackes  chance  hath  fet  me  on  a  fhelfe, 
Where  neither  Loue  can  hurte  me  any  more, 
Nor  Fortunes  hand,  though  fhe  enforce  her  felfe ; 
Difcretion  graunts  to  fet  me  fafe  on  fhoare, 

Where  guile  is  fettred  fafl  and  wifedome  rules, 
To  punifli  heedeles  hearts  and  wilfull  fooles , 
And  fmce  the  heau'ns  haue  better  lot  affign'd, 
I  feare  to  burne,  as  hauing  felte  the  fire  ; 
And  proofe  of  harmes  fo  changed  hath  my  minde. 
That  witt  and  will  to  Reafon  doe  retyre : 

Not  Venus  nowe,  nor  Loue  with  all  his  fnares 
Can  drawe  my  witts  to  woes  at  vnawares. 


LXXXIX.  125 

MY    LOVE    IS    PAST. 

The  two  fii-ft  flafies  of  this  Sonnet  are  altogether  fententiall,  and 
euerie  one  verfe  of  them  is  growndcd  vpon  a  diuerfe  reafon  and 
authoritie  from  therefl.  I  haue  thought  good  forbreuitie  fake, 
onelie  to  fet  downe  here  the  authorities,  with  figures,  whereby 
to  appUe  euerie  one  of  them  to  his  due  lyne  in  order  as  they 
(land.  I.  Hieronimus  :  In  ddicijs  difficile  ejl  feruare cajlitatem. 
2.  Aufonius  :  difptilit  inconfiiltiis  ofnor  etc.  3.  Seneca  :  Amor 
ejiociofa:  caufafollicitndi)iis.  4.  Propcrtius  :  Errat,qiiifinem 
vefatii  qiicerit  a/noris.  5.  Horatius :  Semper  ardentes  acnens 
f a  git t as.  6  Xenophon  fcribit  atnorevi  effie  igtie,  et  flam  ma 
flagrantiorem,  quhd  ignis  vrat  tangeiites^  et  p7-oxima  tantiim 
cremet,  amor  ex  lougiiiqiio  fpe(flante  torreat.  7.  Calenti :  Flu- 
rinia  Zelotipo  fiint  in  amore  mala.  8  Ouidius :  Inferet  arma 
iibiflrita  rebellis  amor.  9.  Pontanus:  Si  vacinim  finer  et  perfidi- 
o/its  amor.  lo.  Marullus :  Quid  tantiun  lachrimis  meis  pro- 
terne  ynfultas  pncr'i  li.  Tibullus  :  At  lafcinis  afJior  rixoe 
mala  verba  miniflrat.  12.  WxxgxYwxs  :  Belln?n  fo^pe  petit  feriis 
exitiale  Ciipido. 


V.J  One  hath  delight  in  fweete  delicious  fare;  ^ 

Z^?^^neuer  takes  good  C^w//^// for  his  frende;     ^ 
'  Loi/e  author  is,  and  caufe  of  ydle  care  ;  3 

„         Lone  is  diftraught  of  witte,  and  hath  no  end  ;     4 
„  Loue  flioteth  fliaftes  of  burning  hote  defire ;      5 

„  Zo//^  burneth  more  then  eyther  flame  or  fire  ;  e 

„  Lojie  doth  much  harme  through  lealofies  affault ;        7 
„  Lone  once  embraft  will  hardly  part  againe  ;  s 

„  Loue  thinkes  in  breach  of  faith  there  is  no  fault ;       9 
,.  Loue  makes  a  fporte  of  others  deadly  paine  ;  "> 

„     Loue  is  a  wanton  Childe,  and  loues  to  brail.  " 

„     Loue  with  his  warre  bringes  many  foules  to  thrall.   ^^ 
Thefe  are  the  fmalleft  faultes  that  lurke  in  Loue, 
Thefe  are  the  hurtes  which  I  haue  caufe  to  curfe, 
Thefe  are  thofe  truethes  which  no  man  can  difproue, 
Thefe  are  fuch  harmes  as  none  can  fuffer  worfe. 
All  this  I  write,  that  others  may  beware. 
Though  now  my  felfe  twife  free  from  all  fuch  care. 

»  Hierotn.     2  Auson.     •  Seneca.  '"  MaruU.  11   Tibull. 

*  Prnpert.     *  Horat.     •  Xenoph.  ^    Virgil,  de  Vino  et  Venire. 

'  Caieni.       *  Ouid.        »  J'ont. 


126  XC. 


MY   LOVE   IS   PAST. 

In  this  Latine  pafsion,  the  Authour  tranflateth,  as  it  were,  para- 
phraflically  the  Sonnet  oi  Petrarch,  which  beginneth  thus. 
Te7tiiemi  Amor  anni  venf  vno  ardendo.  Sonnet.  313. 

Lieto  nelfoco,  e  nel  diiol pien  di/peme,  etc. 

But  to  make  it  feme  his  owne  turne,  he  varieth  from  Petrarches 
wordes,  where  he  declareth,  howe  manie  yeares  he  liued  in 
loue,  as  well  before,  as  fmce  the  death  of  his  beloued  Lawra. 
Vnder  which  name  alfo  the  Authour,  in  this  Sonnet,  fpecifieth 
her,  whom  he  lately  ioued. 


^^K{E  fibi  ter  hinos  annos  vnumqtie  fubcgit 
'^^'^   Diuus  Amor  ;  IcBtufque  fui,  licet  ignibus  arfi  ; 
Spemqiie  habui  certam,  curis  licet  iBus  accrbis. 
lamque  duos  alios  exiitus  aniore  peregi^ 

Ac  fi  fydereos  mea  Laura  voldrit  in  orbes, 
Duxerit  et  feaim  veteris  penetralia  cordis. 
Pertcefum  tandem  vitce  me  poenitet  actce^ 

Et  pudet  error  is  pene  abfumpfiffe  fub  vmbra. 
Semifia  virtutum.     Sed  quce  pars  vltima  rejiat, 
Supplice  mente  tibi  tandem^  Deus  alte,  repono, 
Et  male  tranfactce.  deplore  tempora  vitcB, 
Cuius  agendus  erat  meliori  tramite  curfus^ 
Litis  in  arcejtdcejludijs,  et  pace  colendce. 
Ergb  fumme  Deus,  per  qitem  fum  claufus  ijt  ijlo 
Car  cere,  ab  csterno  faluu?n  fac  effe  periclo. 


XCI.  127 


In  the  latter  part  of  this  Sonnet  the  Authour  imitateth  thofe  verfes 
of  Horace. 

Me  tabula  facer 
Votitia  paries  indicat  vuida  Ad  Pyrrham 

StifpendiJJTc potenti  o^^^-  5- 

Vejtimcfita  maris  Deo. 
Whom  alfo   that   renowned  Florentine  M.    Agnolo  Firenziwla 
did   imitate  long  agoe,    both   in   like    manner   and   matter, 


as  followeth. 


O  niiferi  coloro, 

Che  non  prouar  di  donna  f dee  niai 

II  pericol,  c/i'io  cor/i 

Nel  iempejlqfo  mar,  nella  procella 

Del  lor  cm  del  Ajnore 

Mojlrar  lo  pub  la  tauoletta  pojla 

E  le  vejli  ancor  molli 

Sofpefe  al  tetupio  del  horrendo  Dio 

Di  qiiejlo  mar  crudele. 


PE  captiue  foules  of  blindcfold  Cyprians  boate 
Marke  with  aduife  in  what  eflate  yee  flande, 
Your  Botemaii  neuer  whiflles  mearie  noate, 
And  Folly  keeping  flerne,  flill  puttes  from  lande, 
And  makes  a  fport  to  toffe  you  to  and  froe 
T\s\yX  fighing  unndes,  and  furging  luaues  of  woe. 
On  Beawties  rocke  fhe  runnes  you  at  her  will, 
And  holdes  you  in  fufpenfe  twixt  hope  Sindfeare, 
Where  dying  oft,  yet  are  you  Huing  flill, 
But  fuch  a  life,  as  death  much  better  were ; 
Be  therefore  circumfpect,  and  follow  me, 
Wlien  C/iai/nce,  or  chaimge  of  viancrs  fets  you  free. 
Beware  how  you  returne  to  feas  againc  : 
Hang  vp  your  votiue  tables  in  the  quyTC 
Of  Cupids  Church,  in  witneffe  of  the  paine 
You  fuffer  now  \>y  forced  fond  defire  \ 

Then,  hang  your  throughwett  garmentes  on  the  wall, 
And  fing  with  me,  That  Lone  is  mixt  with  gall. 


128  XCII. 


MY   LOVE   IS   PAST. 

Here  the  Author  by  comparing  the  tyrannous  delightes  and 
deedes  of  blincle  C«//^with  the  honeft  delightes  and  deedes 
of  other  his  fellow  Goddeffes  and  Gods,  doth  bleffe  the  time 
and  hovvre  that  euer  he  forfooke  to  follow  him  ;  whom  he 
confeffeth  to  haue  bene  greate  and  forcible  in  his  doings, 
though  but  litle  of  ftature,  and  in  apparence  weakelie.  Of 
all  the  names  here  mentioned,  Hebe  is  feldomeftredde,  wher- 
fore  know  they  which  know  it  not  alreadie,  that  Hebe  (as  Ser- 
uius  writeth)  is  Iimoes  daughter,  hauing  no  father,  and  now 
wife  to  Hercules,  and  Goddeffe  of  youth,  and  youthlie  fporting. 
and  was  cupbearer  to  lone,  till  the  fell  in  the  prefence  of  all 
the  Goddes,  fo  vnhappelie,  that  they  fawe  her  priuities,  where- 
upon lone  being  angry,  fubflituted  Ganimedes  into  her  office 
and  place. 


^^^Hebus  delightes  to  view  his  Lawrel  Tree  ; 
r-E''  The  Popplar  pleafeth  Hercules  alone  ; 
^ Melijla  mother  is,  and  fautrix  to  the  Bee, 
Pallas  will  weare  the  Oliiie  branche  or  none; 
Of  fhepheardes  and  theire  flock  e  Pales  is  Quene; 
And  Ceres  rypes  the  corne,  was  lately  greene  \ 
To  Chloris  eu'iy  flower  belonges  of  right ; 
The  Dryade  Nimphs  of  woodes  make  chiefe  accoiimpt; 
Oreades  in  hills  haue  theire  delight ; 
Diana  doth  protect  each  bubblinge  Fount  \ 
To  Hehe  lonely  kifflng  is  afign'd ; 
To  Zephire  eu'ry  gentle  breathing  winde. 
But  what  is  Loues  delight  ?  to  hurt  each  where ; 
„      He  cares  not  whome,  with  dartes  of  deepe  defire ; 
„      With  watchfull  iealofle,  with  hope,  with  feare, 
„      With  nipping  cold,  and  fecrete  flames  of  fire. 
O  happye  howre  wherein  I  did  forgoe 
This  litle  God,  fo  greate  a  caufe  of  woe. 


XCIII.  129 

MY   LOVE   IS   PAST. 

In  the  firfl  and  fixt  line  of  tliis  Pafsion  the  Authour  alludeth  to 
two  fentencious  verfes  in  Sophocles ;  whereof  the  firfl  is, 
Jj  /icDpc,  6v/xbs  5*  iv  KaKoTs  ov  ^v/j.<popov,^ 
O/bo/e,  in  euills  fretting  nought  anailes. 
The  fecond  Tb  yap, 

(pavdkv  ris  6.V  dvvaLT  ayivv-qTov  ■woLeiv.'^ 
For  liiho  can  make  vndon  what  once  is  done  ? 
In  the  other  two  ftaffes  following,  the  Authour  purfueth  on  his 
matter,  beginning  and  ending  euery  line  with  the  felfe  fame 
fillable  he  vfed  in  the  firfl :  wherein  hee  imitateth  fome  Italian 
Poets,  who  more  to  trie  their  witts,  [t]hen  for  any  other  conceite, 
haue  written  after  the  like  manner. 


itlVyTf  -^^o^^  ^s  P^^'  ^^^^  woorth  the  day  and  /low'r 
j4-  4  ^F//^;/  to  fuch  folly  firfl  I  did  encline, 

IV/iereof  the  very  thought  is  hitter  fow^r, 
And  flill  would  hurte,  were  not  my  foule  diuine, 
Or  did  not  Reafon  teach,  that  care  is  vaine 
For  ill  once  pail,  which  cannot  turne  againe. 
My  Lone  is  pafl,  bleffed  the  day  and  hoiv'r. 
Whe?i  from  fo  fond  eflate  I  did  decline^ 
Wherein  was  little  fweet  with  rmcWe  fowV, 
And  lofTe  of  minde,  whofe  fubflance  is  diuifie^ 
Or  at  the  left,  expence  of  time  in  vaine^ 
For  which  expence  no  Lone  returneth  gaifie. 
My  Lone  is  pafl,  wherein  was  no  good  howW : 
When  others  ioy'd,  to  cares  I  did  encline, 
Whereon  I  fedde,  although  the  tafle  vfexefoiv^r^ 
And  Rill  beleu'd  Lotie  was  fome  pow'r  diiiine^ 

Or  fome  inflinct,  which  could  not  worke  in  vaine^ 
Forgett'mg^  Time  well  /pent  was  double  gaine, 

1  In  Oedipo-Colonae.  S  In  Trachiniis. 


I30  XCIIII. 

MY   LOVE   IS   PAST. 

In  this  Pafsion  the  Authour  hath  but  augmented  the  inuention  of 
Seraphine,  where  he  write[t]h  in  this  manner. 

Bia/lemo  quando  mai  le  labbra  aperfi 

Per  dar  no77ie  a  cojiei,  eke  accib  me  induce. 
Biajlemo  il  te7npo,  e  quanti  giorni  ho  perfi 

A  feguitar  fc  tenebrofa  luce: 
Biajlemo  ckaj'la,  inchiojlro,  e  verfi, 

Et  quanto  Amor  per  mefama  gliaduce  ; 
Biajlemo  qnando  mai  la  vidi  anchora, 

El  meje,  I'' anno,  e giorno,  el p unto,  elhora. 

"^f  Curfe  the  time,  wherein  thefe  lips  of  mine  [kinde: 
Did   praye   or   praife   the    Dame  that    was    vn- 
I  curfe  both  leafe,  and  ynke,  and  euery  line 
My  hand  hath  writ,  in  hope  .to  moue  her  minde  : 
I  curfe  her  hollowe  heart  and  fiattring  eyes, 
Whofefliedeceyte  didcaufe  my  mourning  cryes  : 
I  curfe  the  fugred  fpeach  and  Syrens  fong, 
Wherewith  fo  oft  fhe  hath  bewitcht  mine  eare : 
I  curfe  my  foolifh  will,  that  flay'd  fo  long. 
And  tooke  delight  to  bide  twixte  hoape  and  feare  : 
I  curfe  the  howre,  wherein  I  firfl  began 
By  louing  lookes  to  proue  a  witleffe  man  : 
I  curfe  thofe  dayes  which  I  haue  fpent  in  vaine, 
By  feruing  fuch  an  one  as  reakes  no  right : 
1  curfe  each  caufe  of  all  my  fecret  paine, 
Though  Loue  to  heare  the  fame  haue  fmall  delight : 
And  fmce  the  heau'ns  my  freedome  now  reflore, 
Hence  foorth  He  Hue  at  eafe,  and  loue  no  more. 


XCV.  131 


MY   LOVE   IS    PAST. 

A  Labyrinth  is  a  place  made  full  of  turnings  and  creekes,  where 
hence,  he  that  is  once  gotten  in,  can  hardly  get  out  againe. 
Of  this  forte  ^ Pliny  mentioncth  foure  in  the  world,  which 
were  moft  noble.  One  in  Cnie  made  by  Dcedalus,  at  the 
commaundement  of  king  Alinos,  to  (hut  vp  the  Miiiotatire  in  ; 
to  which  monfler  the  At/ieniens  by  league  were  bound,  euery 
yeere  to  fend  feuen  of  their  children,  to  bee  deuoured  ;  which 
was  perfourmed,  till  at  the  laft,  by  the  helpe  o{  Ariadne,  T/ie/etcs 
flewe  the  monfler.  An  other  he  mentioneth  to  haue  beene  in 
yEgipt,  which  alfo  Pomponitis  Mela  defcribeth  in  his  firil 
booke.  The  third  in  Lemnos,  wherein  were  ere6led  a  hundreth 
and  fifty  pillers  of  finguler  workmanfhip.  The  fourth  in  Italy^ 
builded  by  Porfenna  king  of  Iletrnria,  to  feme  for  his  fepulchre. 
But  in  this  Pafsion  the  Authour  alludeth  vnto  that  of  Crete  only. 


jj  Hough  fomewhat  late,  at  lafl  I  found  the  way 
il\  To  leauc  the  doubtful!  Labyrinth  of  Loiie^ 
Wherein  (alas)  each  minute  feemd  a  day  : 
Him  felfe  was  Minotaiire ;  whofe  force  to  proue 
I  was  enford,  till  Reafofi  taught  my  mind 
To  flay  the  beafl,  and  leaue  him  there  behind. 
But  being  fcaped  thus  from  out  his  maze, 
And  pafl  the  dang'rous  Denne  fo  full  of  doubt, 
Falfe  Thefeus  like,  my  credite  fhall  I  craze, 
Forfaking  her,  whofe  hand  did  helpe  me  out  ? 
With  Ariadne  Reafoii  fhall  not  fay, 
\  failed  his  life,  ajid  yet  he  rtiimes  away. 
No,  no,  before  I  leaue  the  golden  rule, 
Or  lawes  of  her,  that  floode  fo  much  my  friend, 
Or  once  againe  will  play  the  louing  foole, 
The  fky  fhall  fall,  and  all  fhall  haue  an  end : 
I  wifh  as  much  to  you  that  louers  be, 
Whofe  paines  will  paffe,  if  you  beware  by  me. 

1  Lib  36.  ca.  13. 


132  XCVL 

MY   LOVE   IS   PAST. 

In  this  Pafsion,  the  Authour  in  fkoffing  bitterly  at  Vemis,  and  her 
fonne  Cttpid,  alludeth  vnto  certaine  verfes  in  Ouid,  but  inuert- 
eth  them  to  an  other  fenfe,  then  Ouid  vfed,  who  wrote  them 
vpon  the  death  of  Tibullus.  Thefe  are  tlie  verfes,  which  he 
imitateth, 

Ecce piier  Veneris  fert  euerfanique pharetram, 

Etfra(flos  arcus,  etfine  huefacem.        Elegiar.  lib.  i]x]. 
A\_d]fpice  demifsis  vt  eat  miferabilis  alis, 

Pedloraqiie  infe/la  tondat  aperta  manu.  etc. 
Nee  minus  ejl  confitfa  Venus,  etc. 
Quam  iuuenis  rupit  cum  ferus  inguen  aper. 

"^^l/rHat  ayles  poore  Venus  nov/e  to  fit  alone 
^ijuV'  In  funerall  attyre,  her  woonted  hew    [to  moan  : 
Quite  chang'd,  her  fmile  to  teares,  her  myrth 
As  though  Adonis  woundes  now  bled  anew, 
Or  fhe  with  young  Iiihis  late  return'd 
From  feeing  her  ^^neas  carkas  burn'd. 
Alack  for  woe,  what  ayles  her  little  Boy, 
To  haue  his  tender  cheekes  befprent  with  teares, 
And  fit  and  fighe,  where  he  was  wonte  to  toy  ? 
How  happes,  no  longer  he  his  quiuer  weares, 

But  breakes  his  Boe,  throwing  the  ihiuers  by, 
And  pluckes  his  winges,  and  lett  es  his  fyrebrand  dye  ? 
No,  Dame  and  Darling  too,  yee  come  to  late, 
To  winne  me  now,  as  you  haue  done  tofore  : 
I  Hue  fecure,  and  quiet  in  eftate, 
Fully  refolu'd  from  louing  any  more  : 

Goe  pack  for  fliame  from  hence  to  Cyprus  Ile^ 
And  there  goe  play  your  prankes  an  other  while. 


XCVII.  133 


MY    LOVE    IS    PAST. 

The  Authour  in  this  pafsion  alhideth  to  the  fable  of  Phiueus 
which  is  fetle  down  at  large  in  the  Argcnanticks  of  Apollo- 
niuSy  and  Valerius  Flaccus.  He  compareth  him  felfe  vnto /%/- 
neiis  \  his  Miftres  vnto  the  Harpyes  \  and  his  thoughtes  vnto 
Zethes,  and  his  defires  vnto  Calais^  the  two  twinnes  o(  Boreas; 
and  the  voyce  of  A'e plus  vllra  fpoaken  from  Heauen  to  Calais 
and  Zt'thes,  vnto  the  Diuine  grace,  which  willed  him  to  follow 
no  further  the  miferies  of  a  Loners  eflate,  but  to  profeffe  vn- 
fainedlie,  that  his  Loue  is  pafl.  And,  lafl  of  all,  the  Author 
concludeth  againfl  the  fower  fawce  of  Louc  with  the  French 
prouerbe  :  Pour  vn  plaifir  mille  doulcurs. 


PHe  Harpye  birdes,  that  did  in  fuch  defpight 
1^^  Greiue  and  annoy  old  Phiueus  fo  fore, 
Where  chaf'd  away  by  Calais  in  flight 
And  by  his  brother  Zeth  for  euermore ; 

Who  follow'd  them,  vntill  they  hard  on  hye 
A  voyce,  that  faid.  Ye  Twinnes  No  further yZy. 
PJiineus  I  am,  that  fo  tormented  was ; 
My  Laura  here  I  may  an  Harpye  name ; 
My  thoughtes  and  lufles  bee  Sonnes  to  Boreas^ 
Which  neuer  cea'fl  in  following  my  £>a??ie, 
Till  heau'nly  Grace  faid  vnto  me  at  lafl, 
Leaue  fond  JDelig/ites,  and  fay  thy  loue  is  pafl. 
My  loue  is  pafl  I  fay,  and  fmg  full  glad ; 
My  time,  alas,  mifpent  in  Loue  I  rewe, 
Wherein  few  ioyes,  or  none  at  all  I  had, 
But  floare  of  woes  :  I  found  the  prouerbe  true, 
For  eu'ry  pleafure  that  in  Loue  is  found, 
A  thoufand  woes  and  more  therein  abound. 


134  XCVIIl. 

MY   LOVE   IS    PAST. 

The  Author  in  this  pafsion,  telling  what  Loue  is,  eafeth  his  heart, 
as  it  were,  by  rayling  out  right,  where  he  can  worke  no  other 
manner  of  reuenge.  The  inuention  hereof,  for  the  mofl  part 
of  the  particulars  conteyned,  is  taken  out  of  certeine  Latine 
verfes,  which  this  Authour  compofed  vpon  Quid  Amor.  Which 
becaufe  they  may  well  importe  a  pafsion  of  the  writer,  and 
aptly  befitte  the  prefent  title  of  his  ouerpaffed  Loue,  he  fetteth 
them  downe  in  this  next  page  following,  but  not  as  accompt- 
able  for  one  of  the  hundreth  paffions  of  this  booke. 


pT  Arke  wanton  youthes,  whome  Beaivtie  maketh 
ff]A         blinde, 

And  learne  of  me,  what  kinde  a  thing  is  Loue  ; 
Loue  is  a  Brameficke  Boy,  and  fierce  by  kinde ; 
A  WillfuU  Thought,  which  Reafon  can  not  moue; 
A  Flattring  Sycophant ;  a  Murd'riftg  Thief e ; 
A  Poyfned  choaking  Bayte ;  a  Tyftng  Grief e ; 
A  Tyrant  in  his  Lawes ;  in  fpeach  vntrue ; 
A  Blindfold  Guide ;  a  Feather  in  the  winde ; 
A  right  ^Chameleon  for  change  of  hewe ; 
A  Lamelimme  Lufl ;  a  Tempefl  of  the  minde  ; 
A  Breach  of  Chaflitie ;  all  vertues  Foe  \ 
A  Priuate  warre ;  a  Toilfofiie  webbe  of  woe ; 
A  Fearefull  Lealofie ;  a  Vaine  Defire ; 
A  Labryrinth ;  a  Pleafing  Miferie ; 
A  Shipwracke  of  mans  life ;  a  Smoakleffe  fire  ; 
A  Sea  of  teares  ;  a  lafling  Lunacie ; 

A  Heauie  feruitude )  a  Drop  fie  Thurfl; 

A  Hellifh  Gaile,  whofe  captiues  are  accurfl. 

1  Vide  Plin  natura  Hist.  lib.  28.  cap.  8. 


MY   LOVE    IS    PAST.  135 

f^^ ,  Quid  A  mor  f 

Vid  fit  amor^  qualifqtie^  cupis  me  sare  magifiro  1 
EJl  Veneris  proles :  ccelo  j?tetuendus,  et  Oreo; 
Et  leiiior  vent  is  ;  et  fui minis  ocyor  aiis  ; 
Peruigil  excubitor;  fallax  eomes  ;  inuidiis  hofpes  ; 
Armatus  puer ;  infanus  iuttenis ;  noiiitatis 
Qiiefitor,  belli  faiitor ;  virtuti  inimicus  ; 
Splendid  us  ore,  noeens  pro?niffo  ;  lege  ty  r annus  ; 
Dux  cacus ;  gurges  viciorum;  noflus  alumnus  ; 
Fur  elandti/Iinus ;  mors  viuida;  mortua  vita; 
Dulcis  i?ie Xpert  is,  expert  is  durus  ;  Eremus 
StultiticB ;  facula  ignefcens ;  vcfana  libido ; 
Zclotypum  frigus ;  ?nala  mens  ;  corrupt  a  voluntas  ; 
Pluma  leu  is;  morbus  iecoris  ;  dementia  priidejis  ; 
In/amis  leno ;  Bacc/ii,  Cererifque  minijler ; 
Prodiga  libertas  animce;  pruritus  ijianis ; 
Prauorum  career ;  corrupti  fa?igui?iis  ardor; 
Irrationalis  motus ;  fycophajita  bilinguis  ; 
Stru7?ia  pudicitice  ;  fumi  expers  fla77ima  ;  patronus 
Periurce  linguae;  profirato  fceuus ;  amicus 
Immeritis ;  animi  tempeflas ;  luxuriojus 
Prceceptor,  fuie  fine  malum;  fine  pace  duellum; 
Naufragium  huma7icB  vitcE;  IcBt/iale  vejienui7i; 
Flebile  cordolium;  graue  calcar;  acuta  fagitta  ; 
Sontica  per7iicies,  nodofice  caufa  podagrcE ; 
Natus  ad  i7ifidias  vulpes :  p07itus  lac/iry7narum  ; 
Virgi7tecB  Zo7ics  ruptura;  dolofia  voluptas ; 
Multicolor  fe7pe7is  ;  vre7is  afieclus  ;  i7ier77iis 
Bellator ;  fenijque  caput,  fe7iiu77ique  iuue7it(z  1 
A7ite  die77i  fu7ius  ;  p07'ta7itis  viper  a  ;  7noeJlus 
PolFuiBor ;  fyre7i  fallax  ;  77iors  proeuia  77iorti; 
Injector  7ie77ioru77i ;  er7'oris  Laby7'i77thus ;  a77ia7-a 
Dulcedo  ;  inuentor  falfic ;  via  perditio7iis  ; 
For77iarum  egregius  fpeclator  ;  poe7ia  pere7i7iis ; 
Sufpi7'a7is  ve7itus ;  jfl/igultu  plena  querela  ; 
Trifie  magifieriu7n  ;  multce  iaclura  diei ; 
Martyriiwi  i7i7ioaii ;  te77ierarius  adue7ia;  p07idus 
Sifyplmun  ;  radix  curaru7n  ;  defiidis  efca  ; 
Febris  a7ihela;  fit  is  77iorofa;  hidropicus  ardor  ; 
Vis  vno  dicam  verbo  ?  i7icar7iata  Gehenna  e/l. 


136  XCIX. 

MY   LOVE   IS    PAST. 

This  pafsion  is  an  imitation  of  the  firft  Sonnet  in  Seraphine,  and 
grownded  vpon  that  which  Arijiotle  writeth^  of  the  yEgle,  for 
the  proofe  fhe  maketh  of  her  birdes,  by  fetting  them  to  behold 
the  Sonne.     After  whom  Pliny  hath  written,  as  followeth  : 

Aquila  iinpliimes  etiammim  piillos  ftios  percuiiefts,  Subinde 
cogit  adiierfos  intueri  Solis  radios :  et  fi  conniuentum  hti??iec- 
tantemque  anitnaduertit,  prcscipitat  e  nido,  veliit  adulterinicm 
atque  degenerem:  ilium,  cuius  acies firma  contra  Jletcr it,  educat.'^ 


IX"  He  haughtie  ^gle  Birde,  of  Birdes  the  befl, 


W 

1-^^ Before  the  feathers  of  her  younghnges  growe. 
She  liftes  them  one  by  one  from  out  theire  nefl, 
To  vewe  the  Sunne,  thereby  her  owne  to  knowe  ; 
Thofe  that  behold  it  not  with  open  eye, 
She  lettes  them  fall,  not  able  yet  to  flye. 
Such  was  my  cafe,  when  Loue  poffefl  my  mind; 
Each  thought  of  mine,  which  could  not  bide  the  light 
Of  her  my  Sunne,  whofe  beames  had  made  me  blinde, 
I  made  my  Will  fuppreffe  it  with  Defpight : 

But  fuch  a  thought,  as  could  abide  her  befl, 
I  harbred  flill  within  my  carefull  brefl. 
But  thofe  fond  dayes  are  pafl,  and  halfe  forgotte  ; 
I  practife  now  the  quite  cleane  contrary : 
What  thoughtes  can  like  of  her,  I  like  them  not, 
But  choake  them  ftreight,  for  feare  of  ieopardy; 
For  though  that  Loue  to  fome  do  feeme  a  Toy, 
I  knowe  by  proofe,  that  Loue  is  long  annoy. 

1  Lib.  9.  Hist,  animal.  2  Nat  Hist  lib.  10  cap.  i. 


c.  137 


MY   LOVE   IS   PAST. 

The  Authour  faineth  here,  that  Lmie,  elTaying  with  his  brand,  to 
fire  the  heart  of  fome  fucli  Lady,  on  whome  it  would  not  worke, 
immediately,  to  trie  whether  the  old  vertue  of  it  were  extin- 
giiiflied  or  no,  applied  it  vnto  his  owne  breft,  and  thereby 
fooliflilie  confumed  him  felfe.  This  inuention  hath  fome  rela- 
tion vnto  the  Epitaph  of  Lone,  written  by  AI.  Giroliino  Para- 
bofco  ; 

/;/  cenere  giace  qiiifepolto  Amove, 
Colpa  di  qnella,  che  morir  mi  face,  etc. 


m 


Mj  Efolu'd  to  dufl  intomb'd  heere  lieth  Loue, 

gf^Through  faulte  of  her,  who  heere  her  felfe  fliouldlye; 
He  flrooke  her  breft,  but  all  in  vaine  did  proue 
To  fire  the  yfe  :  and  doubting  by  and  by 
His  brand  had  loft  his  force,  he  gan  to  trye 
Vpon  him  felfe  ;  which  tryall  made  him  dye. 

In  footh  no  force ;  let  thofe  lament  who  luft, 

He  fmg  a  carroll  fong  for  obfequy ; 

For,  towardes  me  his  dealings  were  vniuft, 

And  caufe  of  all  my  paffed  mifery  : 

The  Fates^  I  thinke,  feeing  what  I  had  paft, 
In  my  behalfe  wrought  this  reuenge  at  laft. 

But  fomewhat  more  to  pacyfie  my  minde, 

By  illing  him,  through  whome  I  liu'd  a  flaue, 

He  caft  his  afhes  to  the  open  winde. 

Or  write  this  Epitaph  vppon  his  graue ; 

Here  lyeth  Loue,  of  Mars  the  baflard  Sonne, 
VVhofe  foolijh  fault  to  death  him  felfe  hath  donne. 


138  MY   LOVE    IS    PAST. 

This  is  an  Epilogue  to  the  whole  worke,  and  more  like  a  praier 
then  a  Paffion  :  and  is  faithfully  tranflated  out  of  Petrarch, 
Sonnet.  314,  2.  parte,  where  he  beginneth, 

I  vh  piaiigendo  i  iniei  pafsati  te77ipi 
I  quai pofi  in  amar  cofa  mortale, 
Senza  leuarttii  d.  volo,  hatiencCio  Vale 
Per  darforfe  di  me  non  bafsi  e/sempi.  etc. 


Wf J  Vgeo  iam  querulus  vitce  tot  lujlra  pera^a, 

(tA  Quce  male  confiimpfi^  mortalia  vana  fecutur, 

Cum  tamen  alatiis  potiii  volitaffe  per  altum, 
Exemplarque  fitifse  alij's,  nee  inutile  forfan. 

Tu  mea  qui  peccata  vides,  culpasque  nefandas, 

Coeli  fumme parens^  magnum.,  et  venerahile  numen, 
CollapfcE  fuccurre  animce  ;  mentifque  caduccR 
Candida  defe^um  tua  gratia  fuppleat  omnein. 

TJt,  qui  fujlinui  helium.,  durafqzie  procellas, 

hi  pace.,  et  portu  moriar  ;  minimeque  probanda 
Si  mea  vitafuit^  tamen  vt  claudatur  honejTe. 

Tantillo  vitce  fpacio,  quod  forte  fuperfct, 

Funeribufque,  meis  prcefentii7i  pcrrige  dextram ; 
Jpfe  vides f  in  te  qudm  /pes  mea  tota  repojla  ejl. 

FINIS. 

The  Labour  is  lights  where  Loue  is  the  Paiemijlres. 


THOMAS    WATSON. 


II.  Meliboetis. 

A  Latin  Elegy  on  the  Death  of 

SIR    FRANCIS    WALSINGHAM. 

1590. 

III.  An  Eglogue,   etc. 

Being  a  Translation  of  the  same  into  English. 

1590. 


.  • .  The  two  Works  have  been   placed  upon  opposite 
pages  :  and,  as  far  as  may  be,  with  line  corresponding 

TO  LINE. 


MELIBOEVS 

THOMiE  WATSON  I 

Siue,  A| 

ECLOGA  JN  OBJTVM 

HONORA  TISSIMI    VIRI,  j 

Domini  Francifci  Wallinghami,  Equitis 
aurati,  Diuae  Elizabeth^e  a  fe- 
cretis^  et  fan^lioribus  confdijs. 


L  O  N  D  I  N  I, 

Exciidebat  Robertus  Robinforius. 


M.  D.  L  X  X  X  X. 


AN    EGLOGVE 

Vpon  the  death  of  the 

Right  Honorable  Sir  Francis  Walfingham^ 

Late  principall  Secretarie  to  Her  Maieflie, 

and  of  her  viojle  Honourable  Prhiie 

Councell. 


Written  firR  \\\  latine  by  Thomas  Wat/on,  Gentle- 

man,  and  7iow  by  himfelfe  tranjlated 

into  EngliJJi. 


Mufis  mendicantibus  infultat  A'/Aouc/a. 


AT     LONDON, 
Printed  by  Robert  Robinfon,    1590. 


142 


[EC  LOG  A    INOBITVM,    &c.] 


GENEROSISSIMO  VIRO 

Thomae  VValfinghamo  Armigero 

laudatijjimo  virtutis  &>  litter  arum  afsertori 
Tho.  VVatfonus 

6^.  D. 

D  rifum  faciles  foleo  caiitare  Napceas, 
Et  fpuinagenitcE  furta  iocofa  E)ecB, 
Et  Icetas  gelida  Charites  Ny7nphafque  fub 
V7nbra, 
Et  mist  OS  ioculis,  illecehrifqiie  fales : 
Sed  noiia  iam  rerum  fades  ad  feria  fuadet, 

Et  fojiat  illepida  nojlra  Thalia  fide. 
Jtiuitos  neflo  numeros,  gemituque  refoluor 
y^t  tristes  Elegos,  funereiimque  melos. 
Nee  folics  fundo  lacrymas :  gejnit  Anglia  tota, 

Et  luget  laceris  vndique  fparfa  comis. 
Magnus  enijn  (prohfata)  diem  Francifciis  obiuit, 

Areadice  nostrce  qui  Meliboeus  erat : 
Et  mihi  fubtristes  qui  (te  media7ite )  procellas 

Depulit,  hyberno  vela  ferente  Noto. 
Officio  iubeor  7nifera7idos  (zdere  questus^ 

Et  lacrymis  lacrymas  accu77iulare  tuis. 
Tu  Clemens dig7iare pias  audire  querelas: 

Dimique  ego  fu77i  Corydo7t,  Tityrus  efse  voli. 
Ereptum  nobis  Meliboeiwi  fiebi7nus  a77ibo : 
Elebimus^  vt  raptum  fleuit  amicus  Hylam. 


Sjj^^^^l 


Dignitatis  tuse  (ludiofus 
Thomas  Watfomis. 


[j4J\r  EGLOGVE^    eU.\  ,43 


144  [E  CLOG  A    I  N  O  B  I  T  V  M,    &C.1 


[A  JV   EGLOGVE,    etc.] 


145 


To  the  viojl  vert 2101  IS  Lady,  Lady  Francis 
Sydney,  all  honour  and  happinefife. 

^    "  Ada?n,  vnder  the  Patronage  of  M.  Thomas 

walfingham  I  publiJJied  a  Latine  Fiine- 
rall  poeme,  where  7vith  a  pajloral  Mnfe  I 
vndertake  (in  lone  and  diietie)  to  com- 
??iend  the  vertiioiis  life,  a?id  bewaile  the 
vntimely  death  of  onr  great  Meliboeus  the 
right  honorable  Sir  Francis  Walfingham, 
your  late  deceafcd  Father,  a  found  piller  of 
our  common  wealth,  and  chiefe  patron  of  vert ue,  learning, 
and  chiualrie,  J 71  which  poeme  albeit  I  neuer  attaiiie 
the  heigth  of  his  worthineffe,  yet  7?ianie  (rather  affeftiiig 
his  praife,  then  my  verfe)  haue  requefled  and  perfwaded 
me  to  publifJi  Melibceus  in  EnglifJi,  for  the  more  generall 
vnderfla7idi77g  thereof:  that  as  his  life  was  to  all  77ien 
both  pleafmg  a/id profitable,  fo  his  death  77iight  be  hon- 
ored with  a  publike  forrow :  a7td  that  the  whole  body  of 
this  real77ie,  in  Ia77ie7iting  the  lofse  of  fo  vigilant  a  gouer- 
nor,  might  lear7ie  therby,  (as  by  a  iufl  iieceffttie)  the 
7nore  to  loue,  honor,  and  obey  thofefew,  that  yet  furuiue, 
refc77ibli7ig  hi7n  i7i  high  efiate,  and  vertuous  conditio7i. 
Such  as  the  tra7iflatio7i  is,  J  hu77iblie  ofier  it  to  your 
Ladifliips  prote^io7i,  hoping  it  will  be  as  fauorablie  redd 
a7iJ  accepted,  as  it  is  affeclio7iatly  writte7i  a7id p7'cfe7ited. 

Your  Ladifliips  in  all  duetie 

Tho77ias  Watfon. 

K 


146  [ECLOGA    INOBITVM,    &c.] 


[A.V  EG  LOG  VE,     etc.1 


147 


To  the  coitrtcoics  Reader. 


Entlemen,  if  you  fuppofe  me  vaine,  for 
tranflating  myne  owne  poeme  :  or  negli- 
gent, for  not  doing  it  exacflly  to  the  latin 
originall,  I  thus  defire  to  fatisfie  you.  It 
f^eT^  is  pardonable  for  a  man  to  be  bold  with  his 
owne :  And  I  interpret  my  felf,  left  Melibseus 
in  fpeakingEngliflibyan  other  mans  labour, 
(hould  leefe  my  name  in  his  chaunge,  as  Ti\y  Ainyntas  did. 
A  third  fault  (haply)  will  bee  found,  that  my  paflorall  dif- 
courfe  to  the  vnlearned  may  feeme  obfcure :  which  to 
preuent,  I  haue  thought  good,  here  to  aduertife  you,  that 
I  figure  Englande  in  Arcadia;  Her  Maieflie  in  Diana \ 
Sir  Francis  Walfmgham  in  Melibmis^  and  his  Ladie  in 
Dryas  \  Sir  Phillippe  Sidney  in  AJlrophill,  and  his 
Ladie  in  Hyale^  Mafler  Thomas  Walfmgham  in  Tyte- 
rus^  and  my  felfe  in  Corydon. 


Defiroiis  to  pleafe  you 

Tho.  VVatfon. 


C  L  O  G  A 

I  N  O  B  I  T  V  M 


HONOR  A  T I  SS IM I      VI RI, 

Domini  Francifci  Walfmghami,  Equitis 

aurati,  Diu3e  Elizabeth^e  a  fe- 

cretis^  et  fanclioribus  C07ifUijs. 


Corgbott. 


S^itgru!?;. 


Ityre,  iam  quoniam  prati  per  amxna 
vireta 
Sparguntiir  peaides^  et  nos  confedi- 

miis  ambOy 
Hums  (ft  quid  amas)  effare  fiib 

arboris  vmbi'a, 
QucB  noiia  follicitos  apportent  fata 
dolor es  : 

Cur  tua  cum  molli  Zephyro  fufpiria  pugnanty 
Atq2ie  fercnato  minitantur  pralia  ccelo, 
Qui  tenueui  placida  Mufam  meditatus  aueita, 
Deimdcere  foles  ventos  in  bella  paratos? 
Squalida  quid  fbj  vult  curarum  co7ifcia  veflis  ? 
PeBoi'e  cur  fingidtus  i?iest  ?  cur  lumine fletus  ? 
Quid  fed  et  in  vultu  macies  ?  quid  in  ore  querela  1 
Die  age ;  mcErorem  fit  fas  lenire  inonendo^ 
Aid  falthn  lacrymis  no  fro  s  conneBere  planHus : 
Non  leuis  efl,  luBus  focios  habuiffe^  volupias. 


AN    EGLOGVK 


Vpon  the  death  of  the 

Right  Honorable  Sir  Francis  Waljingham 

late  principall  Secretarie  to  her  Maieflie, 

and  of  her  mofl  Honourable 

Priuie  CouncelL 


(JTorgtion. 


Wi\ysxxi$. 


Owe  Tityrus,  fmce  wee  at  eafe  are  lade, 
And  both  our  flockes  orefpred  the 

flowrie  plaine : 
Sweete   friend  vnfolde  vnder   this 

platan  fliade 
The  fecrete  caufe  of  thy  concealed 

paine, 
How  haps  thy  fighing  threats  the 
cleered  skie, 
with  gentle  Zephyr  waging  often  warres, 
Whofe  Mufe  of  yoare  with  hunnie  melodie, 
did    calme  fierce  winds,  and    ceafe  their  boiflrous 
iarres  ? 
AMiat  means  this  mooming  weed?  thy  weeping  eine? 

thy  pale  afpeO.  ?  thy  munnuring  complaints  ? 
O  fpeake,  that  I  may  ioine  my  teares  with  thine, 
and  eafe  thy  burdened  heart  before  it  faints. 


ISO  [ECLOGA   INOBITVM,   &c.] 

O  Corydon^  Corydon^  noli  perquirere  caufas 
Altius,  et  dirumfando  renouare  dolorem.  : 
Triste  recrndefcet  blando  tantamine  vithtus, 
Nidlaque  liigentem  comihim  lamenta  iniiabunt : 
J mmedicabilibus  morbis  adhibere  imdelam 
Define:  fohis  ego  per  fyliias  luce  carentes. 
Solus  ego  miferceflens  info7'tunia  vitce, 
Vt  vidiiiis  ttirtur,  putri  de  vimi?ie  qiiestus 
Coelorum  contra  crudelia  fydera  fundam. 

2"e  per  ego  tniias  Charifes,  hilar  esq  ue  A^apceas, 
Qiice  toties  choreas  ijlos  duxere  per  agros  : 
Per  pi  Bum  Florce  JlropJmuny  Cererisque  coro7iain  : 
Per  Satyros,  Pajies,  Fauni  vcnerabile  nwnen  : 
Per  vitreas  Thamefis  lymphas :  per  lufira  Diaace^ 
Seu  mauis,  ipfum  per  facrce  jiome?i  Elifce  : 
Deniqiie  per  fiorem  mutati  nuper  Amy  nice  ^ 
Sang2iineum  fiorem,  fynceri  pignus  amoriSy 
Obiejlor,  coecum  ne  celes  peftore  vubius. 
Pande,  precor,  tanti  qiue  fd  tibi  can  fa  doloris. 
Qui  tecum  7'ifu  ftib  ver?io  fole  fruebar, 
Nubila  nunc  hyemis  plorabo  tempora  tecum : 
Vna  duobus  erit  fors^  et  mens  vna  duobus. 

Jnuitum  tacit i  mceroris  prodere  fo7ites 
Supplicibus  votis,  et  amico  fcedtre  cogis. 
Accipe,  qicod fari  getnitus  permittet  acerbus  : 
Ante  diem  (proh  fata)  diem  Meliboeus  obiuit. 
Ergo,  ft  quid  habes  Cory  don  (quid  te  quoque  vatem 
Dicimus  Arcadici)  7iumerofos  incipe  liiftus : 
Anxia  7iamque  77iihi  fistuiit  fuspiria  lingua fji. 


\ 


[AJV   EGLOGVE,    etc.]  151 

0  Corydon  forbeare  by  deepe  inquire 

to  rip  the  skarred  wounds  of  my  vnrefl  : 
No  teares,  no  counfell  can  abate  the  fire, 
which  louing  forrow  kindles  in  my  brefl. 

1  all  alone  in  darkefom  vnkoth  place, 

I  all  alone  rnufl  like  the  Turtle  Doue, 
Whofe  ioy  is  flaine,  bewaile  my  wretched  cafe, 
and  pouTe  out  plaints  agenfl  the  gods  aboue, 

Corgiion. 

By  fyluanc  nymphs,  and  louely  Graces  three, 

that  on  our  lawnes  doe  fport  them  to  and  fro ; 
By  countrie  powres  of  what  fo  ere  degree ; 

by  Floraes  chaplet ;  by  Dianaes  boe, 
By  fruitful!  Pales,  Ceres  wheaten  crowne, 

by  filuer  Thamefis  old  Oceans  dame  ; 
By  chang'd  Aviiutas  flow'r,  that  decks  the  downe ; 

and  laflhe  by  Elifaes  vertuous  name, 
By  thefe,  and  thofe  that  guide  cseleflial  fpheares, 

I  here  coniure  thee  to  difcloafethy  griefe, 
That  I  male  flake  thy  fighing  with  my  teares, 

whofe  comforts  oft  haue  bred  mv  harts  relief. 


Then  thus  (though  loath)  as  griefe  will  fuffer  me, 

my  faltring  tongue  Ihall  tell  my  difcontent : 
That  cares  by  fympathie  maie  worke  on  thee, 

and  thou  vpholde  fome  part  of  my  lament. 
Alas  too  foone  by  Dejlins  fatall  knife 
Sweet  Meliboeus  is  depriu' d  of  life. 
Now  Corydon  (for  eurie  fliepheard  fwaine 

reports  thee  skilful!  in  a  facred  verfc) 
In  fuch  a  meeter  helpe  me  to  complaine, 

as  maie  befit  great  Meliboeus  hearfe. 


152  [EC  LOG  A    INOBITVM,   &c.] 

Corgtion. 

Jncipio :  inecum  DiiicB  lugete  CamoeJice^ 
Et  tu  laurigeri  collis  regnator  Apollo. 
Pegafeas  rip  as  lacrymaruni  fiumen  inimdet : 
Munere  Mufarum  pennis  induta  nigellis 
Eiiolitent  late  tottun  lamenta  per  orhem. 
Nos  etiatn,  quamuis  huia  Jlellisque  priores 
Arcades.,  astricolis  et  gens  chariffima  Diuis, 
Obliti  folitcc  piefatis,  munmtre  ra^ico 
Gyraiites  flainmas  alti  culpemus  Olimpi. 
Ante  diem  (proh  fata)  diem  Meliboeus  obiuit, 
Tantcene  infidunt  anwiis  ccelejlibiis  irce, 
Vt  neque  prcecipiii  pastoris  Candida  virtus ; 
Nee  priidens  rebus  folertia  parta  gerendis  ; 
Nee  pe^us  varia  fuffultiim  Palladis  arte  ; 
Necfuauem  referens  facundia  do^a  Periclem  ; 
Nee  plus  et  patrioi  tiitandcE  feruidus  ardor ; 
Nee  vigil  in  noJlrcB  Di^ynnce  cura  falidem  ; 
Nee  magni  tituli,  feriesque  et  fple?idor  auorum , 
Nee  res  innumercB^  quarum  fulgebat  honor e, 
Saturni  pojfent  frontein  pacare  malignant, 
Et  7iocuum  Lun(z  frigus,  Martisque  calorem? 
O  rigidos  ignes,  6  exitiabile  coelwn  : 
Ante  diem  (proh  fata)  diem  Meliboeus  obiuit. 
Attamen  6  iujlo  mczrori  par  cite  cosli; 
Quci  non  credideram,  miferce  defe&io  mejttis 
y?fipulit,  et  pietas,  et  adurens  cejlus  amoi'is. 
Ah  pudet,  inque  Deos  praue  pigei  eJJ'e  loquutum . 
Crimine  Parcarum  cecidit,  non  crimine  vejlro. 
O  cdterne  pare7is,  nutu  qui  nicbila  cogis, 
Et  fixi  rutilos,  mundique  rotatilis  ignes 
Officio  fertiire  iubes,  terratnque  fouere 
Mobilibus  radijs;  dirarum  fada  fororum 
Jnfpice,  qucB  nufquam  virtuti parcere  norunt : 
Supplicijs  coJiibe  duris,  et  vindice  poena. 
Nojler  enitn  Pajlor,  iiondum  pofcente  fencHa., 
Ante  diem  (proh  fata)  diem  MeUboeus  obiuit. 


[AN  EGLOGVE,    vSr'r.]  153 


(Torniiou. 


I  now  beginne  :  Apollo  guide  my  founde, 

and  weepe  yee  fillers  of  the  learned  hill : 
That  your  Pagafean  fi)rings  may  leap  their  bound, 

end  from  their  floate  maie  feas  of  teares  diflill. 
Let  deadly  forrow  with  a  fable  wing, 

througliout  the  world  go  brute  this  tragedie : 
And  let  Arcadians  altogether  fmg 

a  woefuU  fong  agenfl  heauns  tirannie. 
A /as  too  foone  by  Dcstinsfatall  hiife  ^-^ 
Sivctit  Meliboeus  is  djpriii'd  of  life. 
Are  wheeling  orbs  fo  full  of  foule  defpight, 

that  neither  wifdome,  nor  true  pietie. 
Nor  learned  skill,  nor  fpeech  of  choice  delight, 

nor  care  of  countries  fweete  fecuritie. 
Nor  watchfuU  fludie  for  Dianaes  health, 

nor  gentle  birth  which  vertues  worth  did  raife, 
Nor  honors  titles,  nor  abundant  wealth, 

nor  thoufand  gifts  deferuing  endleffe  praife 
Could  fmooth  the  mallice  of  old  Satiirnes  brow, 

or  heate  of  Mars^  or  Ltmaes  deathfull  colde  : 
O  enuious  heauns,  that  winde  I  wotte  not  how, 

grudging  the  glories  of  this  earthly  molde. 
Alas  too  foone  by  Deflins  fatall  knife :  — - 
Sweet e  Meliboeus  is  depriii' d  of  life. 
Yet  glorious  heauns,  6  pardon  my  blafpheme, 

whofe  witte  in  forrowes  Labyrinth  is  flraide  : 
All  that  I  fpake  was  but  a  furious  dreame, 

it  was  not  you,  but  Fates  that  him  betraide. 
O  thou  eternall  Monarcke,  at  whofe  becke 

the  planets  mooue  and  make  their  influence  : 
O  giue  the  Deflinies  a  wrathfull  checke, 

afflict  them  for  their  fpightfuU  infolence. 
In  cafe  mine  oraifon  feeme  ouerlarge, 

6  yet  vouchfafe  me  but  this  one  requcfl. 
That  fatall  lawes  be  giun  to  Saintes  in  charge, 

whofe  hands  and  harts  wil  alwaies  work  the  befl.. 


154  [ECLOGA   INOBITVM,  &c.]  | 

Sin  maiora  precor  quamfit  mortalibiis  cEquum,  -J 

Hoc  tamen,  hoc  vnum  mifero  concede  petenti : 

Ilk  Deus  nojlri  certiffcma  gloria  rw'is. 

Qui  tua  legatus  re&e  mandata  facej/lt, 

Jnfuruos  lapfus  thalarnos  lunonis  Auernce^ 

Immites  Parcas  rapidi  Phlegeto7itis  ad  imdam 

Increpet,  et  iubeat  pajloriim  abfijlere  fatis, 

Tain  propero  quoniam  deuoluimi  Jlamina  fiifo. 

Pojlhac  (EtJwea  coilorumfiat  in  arce 

II hid  opus,  dignum  Super  is.    Quid  NoBis  alumncB, 

Atque  Erehipoffunt,  quani  Candida  rumpere fila  ? 

Morta  rofam  piceo  vernantem  corripit  ungue : 

Ante  diem  (proh  fata)  diem  Meliboeus  obiuit. 

Inuidet  ( heu )  fiunmis  pajioribus  improba  Morta. 

Astrophilum  pridein  rapuit  vitalibus  auris, 

Delicias  Meliboee  tuas,  Hyalesque  maritum 

Candidulcd  nymphcE  pidchrum,  diun  fata  fineb ant. 

Citm  Pyrenceis  leo  defcendiffet  Iherus 
Montibus,  et  curfu  longinqua  per  cequora  veHuSy 
Belgarum  tandem  violens  arnienta  voraret : 
Astrophilus  ferro  cinBus,  fudibufque prcEuJiis, 
Finibus  eriipit  nojlris,  validoque  fm-entem 
Marte  lacej/iuit,  folo  virtutis  amore. 
Ccetera  ne  dicam,  lacrymce,  gemitusque  fafigant. 
Ad  focej^imi  redeo.     Generi  certaniina  lugens 
Ante  diem  (proh  fata)  diem  Meliboeus  obiuit. 
Dicite  nunc  focij^fi  dicere  forte  pot ejlis, 
Qiiis  vice  defwidi  crefcentes  aggere  claudet 
Montofo  riuos,  ne  pafcua  piBa  pererrent  'i 
Quisfofsa  torrentis  aquas  prohibebit  agello, 
Nefunul  et  Icetas  niefses,  et  pinguia  late 
Deuaflent  cult  a,  lieli  miferis  ploranda  colonis  ? 
Quis  pice  languid^di  fcabiem  curabit  ouilis, 
Aut  alios  vario  fubeuntes  cor  pore  morbos 
Toilet,  et  imniunduni  merfabit fiumine  vellus  1 
Quis  molles  pratis  agnos,  agnos  trepidaiites, 
Et  teneros  celfis  iinpoJiet  mo7itibus  kcedos, 
Nodleque fub prima  fatui'os  in  teHareducctl 
Ante  diem  (proh  fata)  diem  Mehboeus  obiuit. 


[^  A'  EG  LOG  VE,    dr-r.]  155 

What  can  thofe  Imps  of  eiierclowding  mid, 

thofe  ruthlefle  daughters  of  eternall  night ; 
But  (tyrantlike)  funder  their  vitall  twid, 

whofe  fliining  vertues  are  the  worldes  chiefe  light  ? 
Alas  too  foone  by  dcjiins  faiall  knife ^ 
Sweet  Meliboeus  is  depriii'd  of  life. 

And  was  not  AstropJiill  in  floAVTing  prime, 

by  cruel!  Fates  cut  off  before  his  daie, 
Yong  Ajirophill,  the  mirrourof  our  time, 

faire  Hyales  chiefe  ioy,  till  his  decay  ? 
When  late  a  dreadfull  Lyon  in  his  pride 

defcended  downe  the  Fyrcena^an  mount. 
And  roaring  through  the  paflures  farre  and  wide, 

deuowr'd  whole  Belgian  heards  of  chief  account : 
Stout  Aflrophill  incenR  with  fole  remorfe, 

refolu'd  to  die,  or  fee  the  flaughter  ceafl : 
Then  fenfl  with  fire  and  fword,  with  manly  force 

he  made  affalt  vpon  the  furious  beafl. 
But  of  this  tale  teares  d[r]owne  the  latter  part : 

I  mud  returne  to  Meliboeus  fall, 
\\\\o  mourning  flill  for  Ajlrophils  depart, 

forfooke  his  friends,  and  lofl  himfelfe  withall. 
Alas  too  foone  by  Deflins  fatall  knife ^ 
Sweet  Meliboeus  is  depiiiCd  of  life. 

Nowe  tell  me  fhephards  all,  and  fellow  fwayncs, 

who  fhal  with  rampiers  fence  our  country  foile  ? 
And  keep  the  fluds  from  breaking  ore  the  plaines  ? 

and  fheild  our  tender  flocks  from  deadly  fpoile  ? 
Who  fhall  recure  their  faintie  maladies, 

and  purge  their  fleeces  in  foft  running  fl.reams  ? 
Who  fliall  defend  our  lambs  from  ieoperdies  ? 

and  flirowd  our  kids  from  Titans  parching  beames  ? 


156  [ECLOGA    INOBITVM,    &c.] 

Qiiis  prejfo  vacuam  tellurein  findet  aratro, 

Pinguia  diuiduis  ut  fulcis  femiiia  inandet, 

Et  glebis  Jubigat  dentata  crate  folutis  ? 

Qids  7ftetet,  et  vmn;as  Jlrideiitibiis  tmdiqtie  plaujlris 

Exportabit  agro,  ponetqiie  fub  horreafriiges^ 

Sirius  urenti  fpicas  ubi  coxerit  ajlro  ? 

Qiiis  pofUls  minuet  pajiorum  iiirgia  /axis, 

Confilioque  feras  lites,  priuataqiie  bella 

Molliet  eloquio,  dum  quifque  aliena  fubmtrat 

Arua,  nee  ajfiieto  dignaticr  li??tite  Jlrmgi  ? 

Publica  quis  vidui  curabit  commoda  ruris  ? 

Seria  quis  ludis  mifcebit,  et  utile  dulci  ? 

Ante  diem  (proh  fata)  diem  Melibceus  obiuit. 

ScBpe  nieis  olim  placuit  tua  Jlridula  canna 
Auribus^  ad  Parios  quandb  cantabat  olo7^es^ 
Sequana  diuifa7n  qua  fiu^ibus  alluit  urbem, 
Fcelicem^  licit o  fi  regi  feruiat^  urbem. 
Tiim  tua  cordatis  {ineniini^  iuuenilia  pledlra 
Perplacuere  viris,  vpupisque  es  vifus  hyrundo. 
At  nunc  6  Corydon^  quantiun  mutaris  ab  illo 
Tempore^  prima  nouis  fuperatur  Mufa  querelis ; 
Dwnque  pio  fiiortem  Meliboei  carmine  defies. 
Arcadice  toti  dulcis  pJiilomela  videris. 
Attameti  ut  laffo  fit  refpirare  facultas, 
Raucus  ego  cceptos  augebo  carmine  cantus. 
Ante  diem  (proh  fata)  diem  Melibceus  obiuit. 

ynfcelix  mifero  canitur  dum  ncenia  verfu, 
6  quotquot  primcBua  parens  animantia  t err  is 
Indidit^  aut  gelido  ponto,  cceloque  patently 
Omnia  nuncfiimul  ad  moefios  concurrite  plan^us ; 
Vt  pulchella  meas  mundi  totius  imago 
Testetur  lacrymas,  atque  illcetabile  murmur. 

Primtim  fignifero  rnagnus  quas  fixit  in  orbe 
Arbiter,  6  mecum  cu?i^ce  lugete  figui^ce. 
Carcinus  ardorem  lacrymofo  temperet  imbre . 
yEfiiuusque  Leo  rugitibus  impleat  auram  : 


\ 


[AX  EGLOGFE,    Cb-c]  157 

Who  now  flial  til  our  ground,  and  reape  our  corne  ? 

who  fhall  affuage  the  flrife  of  fwelling  pride, 

When  eurie  fwynard  fhall  exceed e  his  borne, 

and  will  not  by  God  Terjninus  be  tyde  ? 

Alas  too  foo?ie  by  Dcstins  fatall  knife ^ 

Sweet  Melibceus  is  depriii^ d  of  life. 

5!^ttgnt«{ 

Thy  tunes  haue  often  pleaf'd  mine  eare  of  yoare, 

when  milk-white  fwans  did  flocke  to  heare  thee  fmg, 
Where  Sea?ie  in  Paris  makes  a  double  fhoare, 

Paris  thrife  blefl  if  fhee  obey  her  King. 
But  now  6  Corydon,  that  lightfome  vaine 

is  changd  from  youth  to  aged  grauitie, 
That  whilfl  I  heare  thee  bitterlie  complaine, 

me  thinks  Apollo  fmgs  in  Arcadie. 
And  yet  afford  thy  moorning  Mufe  fome  refl, 

while  I  (though  skil  and  voice  are  both  decaide) 
With  termes  of  duetie  from  a  penfiue  brefl 

bewaile  my  friend,  whom  cruell  Fates  betraide. 
Alas  too  foo7ie  by  Destij2s  fatall  kjiife 
Sweete  Meliboeus  is  depriiCd  of  life. 

O  all  that  all  the  Vniners  containes 

in  heaun,  or  aire,  or  earth,  or  watrie  deepe  : 
With  mutual  plaints  make  light  my  fecret  pains, 

for  forrow  wafls  in  teares,  where  manie  weepe. 
And  firfl  ye  Figures  in  the  Zodiacke  line, 

that  decke  heauns  girdle  with  seternall  light  : 
O  faine  fome  griefs,  and  knit  them  vnto  mine, 

fuch  griefs  as  may  this  bafer  worlde  affright. 
Now  Cancer  flake  thy  heate  with  brackifli  raine, 

and  Leo  roare,  to  make  the  skie  difmaide  : 


IS8  [E  CLOG  A    INOBITVM,   &c.] 

Et  nolit  faltare  Aries  .•  fletii7nque  perennem 
Amphora  dijlillet :  quid  efiini  nififlei'e  potejlis  ? 
Ante  diem  (proh  fata)  diem  Meliboeus  obiuit. 
Libra  diem  tepido  non  aquet  fydere  no5li  : 
Nam  magis  arridet  tenebrofa  dolentibus  umbra^ 
Splendida  qtiam  lucis  fades  :  lux  confona  Icetis, 
Vidneret  Arcitenens  infedis  cruda  fagittis 
Nujnina  Farcarum,  vt  diro  criiciata  veneno, 
Horrendis  trepidiim  tiirbejit  ululatibus  Or  cum. 
Etpiger  inducat  Capricornusyr^^<9r^  brumes 
MaiifurcB^  pluuias  et  Pifcis  mutuet  undas. 
Et  feriat  comu  Taurus  ;  caiidaque  minaci 
Scorpius  ••  et  Jiufquam  Gtmim  peretmtia  fratres 
Carbafa  fujlentent.     Tu  dejiique  Candida  Virgo 
Viigue  genas  lacera :  quid  e?iim  nifi  trijle  fuperfit ;? 
Ante  diem  (proh  fata)  diem  MeHboeus  obiuit. 
Lucent  is  porrb  finuofa  iwlumina  cceli, 
O  funid  ad  nojtras  accedite  fingida  cur  as : 
Ne  Superum  fedes,  mundo  lacrymante  minori, 
Diffluat  ad  luBum,  quoniam  nihil  es  nifi  lu^us  : 
Nam  mihi  fi  vates  pajlorimi  maximics  Orpheus 
Veridice  motus,  viresque  reclufit  Olijnpi^ 
Pluvibeus  et  gelidus  cycliun  percurris  auaro 
Progreffu,  tardique  premunt  vefiigia  calcis 
Tristities,  gemitus,  lacrymce,  lamenta,  dolores, 
DelircE  tenebrce,  terror.,  dif cor dia,  pallor., 
Per  didces  nobis  comites  in  fitnere^  quando 
Ante  diem  (proh  fata)  diem  MeUboeus  obiuit. 
Tu-  verb  celebj'is  nymphae  Cretenfis  alumne, 
Qid  laudata  tenes  in  lampade  regna  fequenti, 
Exue  nunc  vetei'-es  animos  ad  gaudia  promptos., 
Atque  falutaris  midetur  gratia  fiellce, 
Nee  blanda  virtute  Deum  compefce  furentem. 
Diffimdant  lites  fiammata  palatia  Martis 
Pectus  in  humanum  :  nee,  te  miferante,  cruenta 
Sifiatur  ccEdes,  aut  frce?tos  perferat  ira. 
Auree  Sol  mundo  non  ampliiLS  esto  benigniis : 
Q\\^c\}iQ  prceis,  fequerisque  i^fuo  fed  tempore)  Solem, 
Soluare  in  lacrymas  :  Et  tu  charijfime  Stilbon. 


[AN  EGLOGVE,    d^c.'\  159 

Aquarius  pouTC  thou  downe  fait  teares  amaine, 

and  Aries  let  thy  dancing  now  be  flaide. 
Now  Libra  make  not  aquitiofliall, 

but  fufter  night  to  ouergrow  the  daie  : 
For  darkenes  fits  all  vs  that  Hue  in  thrall, 

let  thofe  haue  Hght  that  lift  to  fport  and  plaie. 
Now  let  the  Ceiiiaure  with  his  poifned  fleele 

vpon  the  Fates  inflicSt  a  deadlie  wounde : 
That  for  mifguiding  late  their  fatall  wheele 

they  may  lament  with  guofls  of  vnder-ground. 
Now  let  the  winter  vnder  Capricome 

lafl  flill :  and  Pifccs  lend  him  watrie  fhowres : 
Let  Taurus  wound  the  welkin  with  his  home, 

and  Scorpio  with  his  taile  fling  fatall  powres. 
Now  Gemini  forbeare  with  gladfome  fhine, 

to  comfort  Sea-men  in  their  chiefe  difpaire : 
Virgo  make  fountains  of  thy  daie-bright  eine, 

and  teare  the  treafure  of  thy  golden  haire. 
Alas  too  foone  by  Dejlins  fatall  knife 
Sii'cete  jNIeliboeus  is  depriu' d  of  life. 

Yee  feauiifoldflafjies,  whofe  euer-circling  fires 

maintain  this  earth  with  influence  from  your  fphears, 
And  with  your  po^^Te  guide  mortall  mens  defires, 

now  leaue  your  harmonie,  and  fall  to  teares. 
Yet  cankred  Saturne  it  were  all  in  vaine, 

^\ith  my  intreats  to  call  for  thy  lament, 
For  if  old  Orpheus  but  a  footh  haue  faine, 

to  miferies  thy  minde  is  alwaies  bent. 
Thou  flill  art  lumpifh,  waiward,  cold,  and  floe, 

attended  on  with  Terror^  doating  night, 
Pale  dif  content,  fighs,  difcord,  teares,  and  woe, 

fit  mates  for  me  that  want  my  chiefe  delight. 
But  thee  faire  lupiter  I  mufl  require, 

to  change  the  gratious  vertue  of  thy  llarre, 
And  not  to  temper  with  thy  gentle  fire, 

the  raging  heates  o^  him  that  breedeth  warre. 


i6o  [E  C  L  O  G  A    1 1^  O  B  I  T  V  M,    &c.] 

Oppofito  Phobhi  lucent  confunde  galero  ; 
Ante  diem  (proh  fata)  diem  Meliboeus  obiuit. 
IJltima  mobi/iimi  fphcBrarii?n,  fed  nii/ii  prima, 
Dum  varios  midata  fiibis,  fundisqiie  labores, 
Luna  tuo  nostras  auge  conaniine  qiiejliis. 
Define  furari  Phceho  fua  liimina,  pennon 
Noftis  ut  obuelent  denfa  caligme  terram, 
Deque  polo  fperent  folatia  nulla  7nifelli 
Arcadts,  eximij  Pajloris  7norte  mifelli. 
Defedusque  tuce  doleant  mortalia  lucis 
Omina  :  fubfimidi  Reges,  poptdique  tremifcanf, 
Effigiein  noBis  quando  fine  JioHe  figuras. 
Humo7'um  tarn  larga  tuo  defcendat  ab  ore 
Copia,  iranfiliant  omnes  ut  marmora  metas. 
Ante  diem  (proh  fata)  diem  Meliboeus  obiuit. 
lamque  graues  audi  spirabilis  aura  querelas : 
Et  qu(ECunque  tuus,  spatio  diffufus  i7tani, 
Contmet  amplexus,  dignentur  promere  mecum 
Eu7iebre  Ianie7iiu7n.     Radijs  ex  cequore  trafli 
Hu77iores,  ge77iitu  pulfi  7nute7itur  in  i77ibre7n. 
Efficia7it  lacry77ice  7iubes,  fufpiria  caufas 
Ve7ito7'U77i,  va7'iu77i  difcordia  fe77iina  ful77ien. 
RubrcB  pyra77iides ,  ardeus  candela,  fagittce 
Acce7if(E,  fci7itilla  vola7is,  ig7iita  capella, 
Idohun,  gra7ido,  to7iitru,JlellcBque  cade7ites, 
CzmHaque  qiice  pa7ido  ge7ie7^a7itur  i7i  cethere,  77iira 
Defuper  ad  7ioJlros  ceda7it  porte7ita  dolor es. 
Ante  diem  (proh  fata)  diem  MeUboeus  obiuit. 

Corgtiott. 

Nimc  mihi  ceffatum  fatis  est :  tii  Tityre  paulu7n, 
Du77i  pofitos  iteriwi  te7ito  depro77ie7'e  lu^us, 
Refpi7'a,  grauibusqiLe  77iodu77i  co7icede  querelis. 
Alter7iis  Jle7ites  vicibus  ca]dabi77ius  a77ibo, 
Ceruicesque  iugo  parili  fubdenius  tderque. 
Tu  [fateo7')  g7'a7idi  tetigijli  77iag7ia  cot/iu7'7to, 
/Ethereos  t7'a^us  7iU77iera7is,  07'bisque  re77ioti 
Virtuies.     At  hu77ii  ta7idhn  77iea  Mufula  ferpet, 
Ac  hu77iili  texet  7iifi.  paJlo7'alia  ca7itu: 


1 


[AJV  EGLOGVE,    &-c.^  l6l 

Let  Mars  roaue  vncontrold  and  kindle  flrife, 

that  Sorrowes  may  fit  downe  by  Slaughters  fide  : 
And  golden  Sol  furceafe  to  fauour  life  \ 

and  Venus  weepe,  as  if  Adonis  dide. 
And  Stilbon  with  thy  hatt  cloude  Phoebus  face, 

and  Ltma  fee  thou  fleale  no  more  his  beames  : 
But  let  thy  Steedes  forbeare  their  nightlie  race, 

and  from  thy  bofome  powre  downe  weeping  flreames. 
Alas  too  Joone  by  DeJIins  fatal  knife^ 
Sweete  Meliboeus  is  depriu^ d  of  life. 

Now  Aire,  and  what  thy  circuites  doe  containe, 

helpe  to  lament  great  Meliboeus  death  : 
Let  clouds  of  teares  with  fighs  be  turnd  to  raine, 

admit  no  winde  but  euergroaning  breath. 
Now  fet  thy  firie  Pyramids  to  viewe, 

thy  diuers  Idols^  Candles  burning  bright : 
Inflamed  Shafts,  Cofnets  of  dreadfuU  hewe ; 

Sparkles  that  flie,  and  Starres  that  fall  by  night. 
Let  all  thy  Meteors,  of  what  euer  kinde, 

with  terror  fort  them  felues  in  iufl  araie  : 
And  worke  fuch  fear  in  euery  mortall  minde, 

that  all  the  world  may  waile  for  ones  decaie. 
Alas  to\o\foone  by  Deflins  fatal  knife, 
Sweete  ^leliboeus  is  depriu^ d  of  life. 

Corgtott. 
O  Tityrus  thy  plaint  is  ouerlong, 

here  paufe  a  while,  at  Cory  dons  requefl : 
Of  what  is  wanting  in  thy  farfet  fong, 

my  moommg  voice  fhall  flriue  to  tell  the  red. 
But  I  mufl  forrow  in  a  lower  vaine, 

not  like  to  thee,  whofe  words  haue  wings  at  wil : 


f 


162  [ECLOGA    INOBITVM,    &c.] 

Est  mea  fimplicitas  rudibus  contenta  canimiis, 

Attamen  6  vtindm  jaa^o  defonte  bibiffem 

Dignos  perpdua  Mdib(Ei  Imide  liquores, 

Et  folidas  poffem  rupes  mollire  caneiido : 

Ante  diem  (proh  fata)  diem  Meliboeus  obiuit. 

Omnia  nunc  iplc  fpadofi  Numina  ruris^ 

Accelerate  gradus,  viridiqiie  in  cefpite  Diui 

Cumbentes,  fparfisque  genas  himioribus  alio 

Defliixis  cerebro,  variato  nmrmure  nofiras 

{Nam  vejler  Meliboeus  erat)  fulcite  camcBuas. 

Et  cidtce  Charites  paidifper  mittite  hicos 

Suaidbus  exhilarare  fonis^  aid  fole  forejio 

Pe^ere  flaiientes  per  ebiirnea  colla  capillos. 

Didcis  ad  afcatdce  nnmeros  non  motibus  itsqiiam 

Saltetur  leidbus  :  deftjlant  ludere  nymphis 

Pcrmijli  Satyr i  '  lacrymce  fmt  fola  volupfas. 

ysta  nouos  etenhn  depofcunt  tempora  mores j  ^  .  ■ 

Ante  diem  (proh  fata)  diem  Meliboeus  obiuit. 

In  fyhds,  exidafids  iam  qucelibet  arbos 

Erondibus,  amifjum  doleat  midata  virorem. 

Iiiniperi  vernix  exiidet  corpore  fedlo^ 

Et  fpiffi  Myrrhce  fcBCundo  cortice  rores. 

In  fyhds  corid  crocitent,  et  bubo,  Strygesque^ 

Vidturiusque  gemant :  Jlrepitent  Jliirni,  graadiqiie, 

VjdfoJias  rudibus  cucidis  geminantilms  odas. 

Sed  turdus,  fringilla,  rubella,  et  alauda,  et  Acanthis, 

Et  reliqitCB  taceant  volncres,  quce  didce  fufurra?it. 

In  fyhds  Vri,  vidpes,  vrfiqite  Inpiqiie, 

Etfrendens  aper,  et  catidis  comitata  lexna, 

Vicinas  feriarit  metiiendis  queflibus  auras : 

Ante  diem  (proh  fata)  diem  Mehboeus  obiuit. 

Jam  viduis  in  agris  fegetes  capita  indinate. 

Nee  teuids  graiddam  fpicam  fuflentet  arifla, 

Agricola  rapto,  qid  vos  runcare  folebat. 

Iam  vidids  in  agris  tenerce.  marcefcite  vites, 

Inque7iouo  crefcens  moriatur  palmite  gemma, 

Qiiandoqiddemperijt,  qid  vinitor  effe  folebat. 

Iam  viduis  in  agris  criidi putrefcite  fruBus, 

Caflajiece,  pyra.  pruna,  nuces,  et  citrea  mdla, 


[A  AT  EGLOGVE,    dr'r.]  163 

An  humble  flile  befits  a  fimple  Swaine, 

my  Mufe  (hall  pipe  but  on  an  oaten  quill. 
Immortall  Faiuii^  Satyrs,  and  great  Fa7i, 

the  Gods  and  guiders  of  our  fmitfull  foile, 
Come  feat  your  felues  by  me,  and  waile  the  man, 

whofe  death  was  haflned  by  his  vertuous  toile. 
Yee  comelie  Graces  neither  dance  nor  plaie, 

nor  kembe  your  beauteous  treffes  in  the  Sun, 
But  now  fmce  Meliboius  is  awaie, 

fit  downe  and  weepe,  for  wanton  daies  are  dun. 
Now  in  the  woods  be  leafeleffe  eury  Tree, 

and  beare  not  pleafant  fruits  as  heretofore  : 
Myrrha  let  weeping  gums  diRill  from  thee, 

and  help  to  make  my  dolefull  plaint  the  more. 
Now  in  the  woods  let  ?iight-rauns  croak  by  daie, 

and  gladles  Owles  fhrike  out,  and  Vuiturs  grone  : 
But  f mailer  birds  that  fweetly  fmg  and  play, 

be  whifl  and  flill :  for  you  can  make  no  mone. 
Now  in  the  fields  each  cor7ie  hang  down  his  head, 

fmce  he  is  gon  that  weeded  all  our  corne  : 
And  fprouting  Vines  wither  till  you  be  dead, 

fmce  he  is  dead,  that  fhielded  you  from  florme. 


i64  [ECLOGA    INOBITVM,    &c.] 

Infitor  occubuit,  mala  qui  cajirare  folebat. 
lam  vidids  ah  agris  pidchri  difcediteflores^ 
Lilia,  narciffi,  calthce,  violceque,  rofceqiie, 
Qui  duduin  fioster  topiarius  ejjfe  folebat, 
Ante  diem  (proh  fata)  diem  Meliboeiis  obiuit 
O  vidui  riiris  vepres,  I'iburna,  rub  eta  ; 
O  valles,  cainpi,  monies ;  oflebilis  Eccho; 
O  qucR  lugetis  defim^um  examina  regem  ; 
O  fojites,  riui,  vada,  flumijta,  Jlagfia,  paludes ; 
Tuque  coaxatrix  ad  craffas  rana  lacunas  ; 
Et  nymphcB  gelidis  habitantes  antra  fub  undis 
Saxea,fed  molli  femper  viridantia  mufco  ; 
O  arme7ita,  fues,  et  oues,  ouiumque  magijlri, 
Infantes,  pueri,  iuue?iesque,  virique,  fenesque, 
MatrojKxque  graues,  nuptce,  i7inuptceque puell(B 
Qiwtquot  in  Arcadia  vitalem  ducitis  auratJt, 
Ofimul,  6  mecum  miferos  effimdite  queftus : 
Ante  diem  (proh  fata)  diem  Meliboeus  obiuit. 

Jflhcec  mitte  mihi :  me,  me  magis  ifla  decebunt, 
Quem  dolor  augefcens  curis  mordacibus  urit. 
Occidis  6  dulcis  Meliboee,  o  patrue  dulcis, 
O  pater,  6  quid  non  ?  6  noflri  gloria  ruris 
Mafcula,  fir  malum  Diua.  mufiimen  Elifce. 
Sicut  enim  robor,  vel  quce  fuperminet  ingens 
Ornus,  in  exceljas  dum  furgit  vertice  nubes, 
Perferat  ipfa  licet  violenti  fulminis  iflus, 
Lu^antesque  ruant  venti  circumque  fupraque, 
Perque  comas,  perque  ora  imberfiuat,  ilia  nee  atro 
Fulmine,  nee  vento  luMante,  nee  imbre  fatifcit : 
Haud  fecus  ille  vices  fortunce.  pertulit  07nnes, 
Sed  femper  conflans,  et  Elifce  fidus.  At  eheu, 
Antp  diem  (proh  fata)  diem  Mehboeus  obiuit. 
Tu  reBe  Cory  don  ad  noflras  rura  querelas 
Impellis  clamore  tuo :  Sed  totus  ut  orbis 
Nobifcum  rapti  deploret  Solis  acerbum 
Occafum,  falfo  regnantia  Numina  campo 


[AN   EGLOGVE,    <5r^.vr.]  165 

Now  in  tlie  fields  rot  fruits  while  you  are  greene, 
fince  he  is  gon  that  vfde  to  gratY  and  grace  you  : 
And  die  faire  Flowrcs^  fince  he  no  more  is  feene, 

that  in  Dianaes  garland  vfde  to  place  you. 
O  heards  and  tender  flocks,  6  handfmooth  plains, 

6  Eccho  dwelling  both  in  mount  and  vallie  : 
0  groues  and  bubling  fprings,  6  nimphs,  6  fwains, 
6  yong  and  olde,  6  weepe  all  A?'cadie. 
Alas  too  f 00 fie  by  Dejlitis  fatall  knife 
Sweete  Meliboeus  is  depriu^d  of  life, 

O  let  me  interrrupt  thee  yet  once  more, 

for  who  fhould  more  lament  his  loffe  then  I, 
That  oft  haue  tafled  of  his  bounteous  Rore, 

and  knew  his  fecret  vertues  perfe6llie  ? 
We  haue  alreadie  fummond  euerie  part, 

excepting  that  which  in  the  Ocean  lies  : 
To  (land  copartners  of  our  wofuU  fmart, 

and  beate  the  fenfeleffe  aire  with  Elegies. 
Now  therfore  Neptune  grant  me  this  one  boone, 

depofe  great  loue  for  fo  mifguiding  fate  : 


i66  [ECLOGA    INOBITVM,    &C.J 

Compellare  libet,  luBuque  fiihire  profiindiim  : 

Omnia  nam  gremio  comple^itur  Amphitrite. 

Hue  ades  6  Neptune  pater ^  fur caqiie  tridetiti 

Jgnauo  minitarepolo,  quifydere  nullo 

Immites  Erebi,  Fatique  edercuit  iras ; 

Non  impune  ferat  tantum  patientia  coeli 

Deliftiun :  fub  aquis  eogatur  viuere  7nagnus 

luppiter^  etfuprd  tufati  dirige  leges  : 

Ante  diem  (proh  fata)  diem  Meliboeus  obiiiit. 

Hue  ades  O  Nerei  nunquam  7iifi  vera  caiientis 

Glauce  fejiex  vates;  et  tu  Terrceque  marisque 

Fill  Phorce  vent,  Ceto  comitate  marita, 

Quce  feruaturum  fuluo  pomaria  frii5lu 

Confita  ferpentem  peperit^  mirabile  monjlrum  : 

Tuque  fiouis  dudum  titulis  imbute  Palcemon  : 

Et  tot  diuerfas  oPtjn  mentitejiguras, 

Ad  nos  Carpathio  vates  e  gurgite prodi : 

Et  Tethis,  fiatuque  minor  Thetys :  Ilicet  omncs 

Dijque  Deceque  maris,  ny77iphceque,  F/ierufa,  Ligcea^ 

Lajnprothoe,  Melite,  Galatceaque,  Cymothoeque, 

Nobifcum.  flentes  totos  infumite  riuos. 

Ante  diem  (proh  fata)  diem  Meliboeus  obiuit. 

Interea  Triton  stridenti  marmora  concha 

Ferfonet  extremas  pr(^terlabentia  terras^ 

Et  rauco  celebret  Meliboei  funera  cajztu, 

Lugubri  cantu,  quern  coerula  defer  at  icnda 

In  varias  or  as  Fliosbo  fub  utroque  iacentcs, 

Et  trifli  prceter  folitum  rumore  fufwrans, 

Innumeros  voluat  per  inania  littora  plait^us. 

Non  itd  lafciui  furgant  delphines  in  altum^ 

Ut  capiant  pueros,  cythara  vel  Arionis  ipfl 

Sint  iterwn  capti;  fed  abundent  hmiina  fietu. 

Et  tepidu7n,  fed fyncerum  nunc  i77iproba  Syren 

Exu7idet  rorem,  fparfos  la7iiata  capillos. 

Ante  diem  (proh  fata)  diem  Meliboeus  obiuit. 

Corgbott. 
Ia7n  fatis  efl  lacrymis  indultu7n  Tityre :  panliim 


[ANEGLOGVE,    ^c]  it; 

That  Mclibccus  wounded  all  too  foone, 

by  Moriaes  malice  dies  before  his  date. 
And  thou  old  Glauciis  with  diuining  blefl, 

Prophet  to  him  that  neuer  fpeakes  but  truth, 
Come  with  Palconon,  F/iorciis,  and  the  red, 

and  here  giue  oracle  of  endles  ruth. 
Come  TdJiis  come  with  TJidis  after  thee, 

and  all  thy  \vatrie  nymphs,  a  louelie  traine : 
Vouchfafe  to  fit  vpon  thefe  bankes  with  me, 

that  I  may  heare  both  thee  and  them  complaine. 
And  thou  great  Triton  with  thy  founding  fhell, 

impart  my  grieuance  vnto  euerie  fhore  : 
And  ^dth  a  murmure  make  the  w^aues  goe  tell, 

that  worthie  A'Teliboeus  breaths  no  more. 
Now  let  no  Dolphins  feeke  Arions  Mufe, 

nor  play  by  Hiore  to  ketch  vp  heedles  boies  : 
Let  them  fuppofe  fwcete  Muficke  out  of  vfe, 

and  wanton  louetricks  to  be  foolifh  toies. 
Deceitfull  Mermaids  leaue  your  auncient  guife, 

forbeare  to  fmg  while  tempefl  troubles  vs  : 
Let  me  behold  whole  fountains  in  your  eies, 

for  weeping  fits  vnhappie  Tityrus. 

Corgtion. 
But  Tityrus  inough,  leaue  of  a  while  : 


t68  [E  clog  a    in  obit  VM,   &c.] 

Aufculta^  et  compoiie  meis  fermonibus  or  a, 

Dum  meliora  loquar  coekjli  Numine  doflus : 

Nam  mihi,  nefcio  quo ^  plenum  fpir amine  pe^u^ 

Lcetitias  ardet  muliebria  pqfl  lamenta. 

Tu  mecum  Icetareftmul,  quid  nubila  tecum 

Vnanimis  luxi:  fit  tempus  vtrique  ferenum, 

Non  ita  multa  fubejl  itd  longi  caufa  doloris. 

Abfalsb  querimus  Meliboeum  fata  fubiffe 

Lurida,  cum  dir(E  molis  compage  folutus, 

Et  mcejlam  placido  commutans  fydere  terram^ 

yEternas  luces  oculis  miratur  apertis. 

Illefupra  coelc:  ( quifquis  fuit  ille  Deorum^ 

Qui  mihi  fuggejfit )  virtuti  prcemia  liuor 

Ne  raperet^  vitam  fir  mantis  pocula  fumpfit 

Ne^aris,  et  noftras  ridet  fuper  afira  querelas. 

Tityre  fcelici  laetum  Paeana  canamus. 
Ccelefles  inter  turmas,  quas  ordo  nouenus 
Diuidit,  (antiquo  fifas  efi  credere  vati) 
yam  nofier  Meliboeus  agit ;  qudflammea  late 
Collucent  Seraph  in/  Et  f aero  plena  liquor e 
Plus  fapiunt  Cherubin;  et  qua  ceiifura  potentis 
lujla  Thronos  intrans  mortalia  fingula  librat : 
Quafijnul  a  f aero  dominantia  numina  nomen 
Officio  capiunt,  midtum  parentque  iubentque : 
Qua  princeps  rm.mtx\is  fubie^is  myfiica  pandit 
Ciuibus :  et  femper  fuperantibus  vtitur  armis 
Turba  Proteflatum  :  Virtutes  mira  faceffunt : 
Denique  qua  maioraferens  Archangelus  orbi 
Cantat^  et  Angelicus  qui  nunciat  ordo  minora. 
Tityre,  foelici  laetum  Paeana  canamus. 


[AN   EGLOGVE,    &'c.\  169 

(lop  moorning  fprings,  drie  vp  thy  drearie  eine, 
And  blithlie  intertaine  my  altred  Rile, 

inticd  from  griefs  by  fome  allure  diuine. 
For  now  my  mind  reclaimd  from  carefuU  mone, 

gins  fault  hir  giuing  place  to  forrows  fourfe : 
And  in  hir  change  intreats  thee  ceafe  to  grone, 

that  as  we  grieud,  fo  we  may  ioie  by  courfe. 
In  iufl  complaint  though  forrowes  were  begun, 

and  all  too  litle  for  the  man  we  waile : 
Yet  now  at  lafl  our  forrows  mufl  be  done, 

and  more  then  moorning  reafon  mufl  preuail. 
Iniufllie  grudge  we  Melibccus  death, 

as  though  his  worth  were  buried  in  his  fate : 
But  neither  are  his  vertues  drenchd  in  Leath^ 

nor  vertuous  foule  remoud  to  meaner  flate : 
His  faith  hath  framd  his  fpirit  holie  wings, 

to  foare  with  AJlrophil  aboue  the  Sun  : 
And  there  he  ioies,  whence  euery  comfort  fprings, 

and  where  the  fulnes  of  his  bliffe  begun. 
Let  vs  be  ioifull  after  long  an?ioie, 
Since  Melibceus  ihis  i?i  perfeH:  ioie. 
Our  Meliboius  lius  where  Seraphins 

doe  praife  the  Highejl  in  their  glorious  flames  : 
Where  flowes  the  knowledge  of  wife  Cherubius  : 

where   Throans  exhibit  earthlie  deeds  and  names  : 
Where  Do7ninations  rule  and  yet  obaie  : 

where  Pri?icipalities  to  lower  powers 
Deepe  hidden  mifleries  doe  flill  bewTaie : 

where  arms  are  vfd  by  foe-fubduing  powers. 
Where  Vertues  pra6life  miracles  and  wunder  : 

where  both  ArcJiangeh  and  fweet  Angels  fmg, 
\Vhofe  office  is,  to  vs,  that  Hue  here  vnder, 

from  heaun  caelefliall  mefiages  to  bring. 
Let  vs  be  ioifull  after  long  annoie, 
Since  Melibceus  lius  in  perfit  ioie. 
Now  Melibceus  in  compareleffe  place, 

drinkes  Neflar,  eates  diuine  Ambrofia ; 
And  hath  fruition  of  etemall  grace, 

and  with  his  countnance  cheeres  Arcadia. 


lyo  [ECLOGA    INOBITVM,    &c.] 

Cum  fuperis  Diuis  diuinas  incolit  mxes 
Ambrofijs  epulis  pastus  Melibceus :  et  alto 
Culmine  defpiciens  per  tralucentis  Olimpi 
Stellas,  Arcadiam  viiltu  folatur  amico. 
Nos  ex  officio,  dum  fpiritus  incolit  ajlra, 
Spargamus  violis,  et  olenti  corpus  Acant/io, 
Purpureifque  rofis,  cafiaque,  thymoque  et  amomo  : 
Et  merito  tantum  careat  nefunus  honore^ 
Ornemus  velo,  pulchrifque  tapetihus  artus, 
O prceclare,  tuo  dignos,  Maufole,  fepulchro. 
DucamiLS  vigiles  nofles  ad  triste  cadauer^ 
Eulogijs  plenos  recitantes  undique  verfus. 
Tityre,  foelici  laetum  Paeana  canamus. 
Solemur  Dryadem,  nimio  quce  vi^a  dolore, 
( Heic  vereor )  ficut  quondam  Philac'eia  coniux, 
Amplexans gracilem  defunBi  coniugis  umbra fu, 
Expirabit  amans.     Hyalenfolemur  honored 
Matris  adhcerentem  lateri,  iun^isque  querelis 
Mollia  ad  immites  tende7item  brachia  coslos, 
Brachia  Sithonijs  niuibus  mage  Candida,  quorum 
Astrophilus  toties  in  vincula  grata  cucurrit, 
Vt  cingi  cupidcz  Jinuofis  vitibus  ulmi. 
Deniqul  vexillis  nigrum  parmisque  feretrum 
CondamuSjfuruos  injignia  debita  pannos 
Tigridis  ut  vultu  decorent,  et  front e  minaci. 
Tityre,  foelici  laetum  Paeana  canamus. 
Jmprimis  autem  facram  conemur  liter  que, 


[-■/  A'   EG  LOG  V£,    A-v.]  lyi 

Then  while  his  fpirit  dwels  in  heaunlie  towres, 

let  vs  performe  what  honor  dutie  willes  : 
Let  vs  adorne  his  facred  tumb  with  flowres, 

and  fweete  it  with  the  riches  of  our  hilles. 
Our  vernall  F/ora  that  bewailes  our  lolTe, 

will  gladlie  let  hir  flowrie  locks  be  rent : 
And  clad  hir  felfe  in  moornfuU  roabes  of  moffe, 

if  all  the  treafure  of  hir  buds  were  fpent. 
Then  Flora  lends  vs  thime  and  violets, 

fweete  balme  and  rofes  for  his  buriall  ; 
Beflow  no  wealth  on  wanton  amorets, 

but  fpare  it  to  adorne  his  funerall. 
And  Pa/es  bath  his  lims  in  fluds  of  milke, 

and  couer  him  with  coflly  ornament : 
Inflirine  his  corps  in  fheetes  of  foftefl  filke, 

for  he  deferus  Afaiifolus  monument. 
And  Tityrus  let  vs  before  the  reft 

fet  holie  lights,  and  watch  his  breathles  corfe, 
Singing  fweet  himns  for  him  whofe  foule  is  bleft, 

though  parted  from  his  flefh  by  deaths  diuorce. 
Now  cheere  we  Dryas  in  hir  miferie, 

who  ouerlong  bewailes  hir  hapleffe  cafe  : 
Lefl  ouerlouing  like  Laodaiiiie^ 

fhee  loofe  hir  felfe  in  deepe  fuppofd  imbrace. 
Now  call  we  Hyale  from  whifpring  flreames, 

increafl  with  teares  (true  feruants  of  annoie) 
Who  takes  no  pleafure  but  in  griefs  extreames, 

nor  ioies  in  ought  but  in  hir  want  of  ioie  : 
Faire  Hyale^  who  wringing  oft  hir  armes, 

hir  amaes  far  whiter  then  Sytkonian  fnoa, 
With  doubling  fighs  bewails  hir  helples  harmcs, 

Alas  that  helples  harmes  fhould  vexe  hir  fo. 
Yet  beuteous  Nymph  thy  carefull  mother  Hues, 

(long  may  fhee  Hue,  and  lining  eafe  thy  hart) 
Accept  what  comfort  hir  furuiuing  giues, 

and  in  lifes  comfort  drown  thy  forrows  fmart. 
Helpe  thou  with  vs,  and  eurie  countrie  wight, 

to  chace  all  grieuance  from  Diajiaes  minde  : 
From  drad  Diana,  earths  and  heauns  delight, 

Diana,  glorie  of  hir  fexe  and  kinde  ; 


172  [ECLOGA    INOBITVM,    &c.] 

Totaqiie  folari  nohifcum  rura  Diamun; 
QucB  caput  ejl  huius  regni,  qucs  gloria  regni; 
Quae  Cybele  coeli  nostri,  quce  nojlra  Sybilla; 
QucB  pietatis  amans  ;  placidce  quce  pads  arnica  ; 
Quce  genus  et proauos  proprijs  virtuUbus  ornat ; 
Qiice  varijs  loquitur  Unguis ;  quce.  vatibus  ipfa 
Jndulget  vates^  et  do^is  doBior  ipfa  ; 
Quce  lunonis  habet  gejtum,  Moresque  Mineruce^ 
Et  veneris  formam  ;  quce^fit  licet  innuba  virgo. 
Exuperat  reges,  quantum  querceta  myricas. 
Sed  quid  earn  refero,  quce  nojlro  carmine  maior, 
EJl  cajitanda  tuo  dulcis  Spencer e  cothurno, 
Cuius  inejl  7mmeris  Hiblcei  copia  mellis. 
Tu  quoque  nobijcum  (quoniam  tic  nojler  ApolloJ 
Lugentem  folare  Deam,  quoties  Meliboei 
Trijlia  lacrymulis  preciofis  funera  deflet. 
Die  illi  (tu  namque  potes  fcelice  camcena) 
Arcadas  innumeros,  quanquam  Melibceus  obiuit, 
Prcejlantes  fupereffe  viros,fimiles  Melibcei. 
Damoetam  memora,  quo  non  pr cedar ior  alter, 
Non  quifquam  ingenio  melior,  non  promptior  ore, 
Non  grauior  vultu,  nee  ad  arma  paratior  extat : 
J  lie  ejl  Damaetas,  qui  iuris  corrigit  iram, 
Quem  vocat  Hattonum  Triuioe  venerabile  Numen 
Damonem  memora,  qui  Nejlora  pluribus  a?i7iis 
Confdioque  refert  nunquam  nifi  vera  monenti  : 
Nam  quod  erat  magjto  maturus  Ncjlor  Atridce, 


\AN   EGLOGVE,    dr-r.]  173 

Diana,  wondrous  mirrour  of  our  dales  ; 

Diana  matchleffe  Queene  of  Arcadie  \ 
Diana,  whofe  furpaffing  beauties  praife 

Improous  hir  worth  pafl  terrene  deitie ; 
Diana,  Sibill  for  hir  fecret  skill ; 

Diana,  pieties  chief  earthlie  friend  ; 
Diana,  holie  both  in  deede  and  will ; 

Diana  whofe  iufl  praifes  haue  no  end. 
Ah  but  my  Mufe,  that  creeps  but  on  the  ground, 

begins  to  tremble  at  my  great  prefume, 
For  naming  hir,  whofe  titles  onelie  found 

doth  glad  the  welkin  with  a  fweet  perfume. 
For  in  hir  minde  fo  manie  vertues  dwell, 

as  eurie  moment  breed  new  pieties  : 
Yet  all  in  one  coioind  doe  all  exccU, 

and  crowne  hir  worth  with  fundrie  deities. 
But  that  vnwares  my  forie  flile  proceeds 

drad  Cynf/iia  pardon  :  loue  defires  difpenfe  : 
As  loues  high  Oaks  orelook  Fans  flender  reeds, 

fo  boue  all  praifmg  flies  thine  excellence. 
Yet  left  my  homefpun  verfe  obfcure  hir  worth, 

fweet  Spencer  let  me  leaue  this  taske  to  thee, 
Whofe  neuerRooping  quill  can  befl  fet  forth 

fuch  things  of  flate,  as  paffe  my  Mufe,  and  me. 
Thou  Spencer  art  the  alderliefefl  fwaine, 

or  haply  if  that  word  be  all  to  bafe. 
Thou  art  Apollo  whofe  fweet  hunnie  vaine 

amongfl  the  Mufes  hath  a  chiefefl  place. 
Therefore  in  fulnes  of  thy  duties  loue, 

calme  thou  the  tempeft.  of  Diafiaes  brefl, 
Whilfl  fhee  for  Melibccus  late  remoue 

afflicts  hir  mind  with  ouerlong  vnrefl. 
Tell  hir  forthwith  (for  well  fhee  likes  thy  vaine) 

that  though  great  Meliboeus  be  awaie  : 
Yet  like  to  him  there  manie  flill  remaine, 

which  will  vphold  hir  countrie  from  decaie. 
Firfl  name  Damoitas,  flowre  of  Arcadie, 

whofe  thoughts  are  prudent,  and  fpeech  vertuous, 
Whofe  looks  haue  mildnes  ioind  with  Maieflie, 

whofe  hand  is  libcrall  and  valorous : 


174  [ECLOG  A    INOBITVM,    &c.] 

Qui  patrem  patrice  multis  Aiacibus  viium 
PrcEtulit^  id  nojlrce,  Damon  longceuus  Elifce: 
Regales  gazas  re^os  conferuat  in  ufus 
Damon,  CcEcilium  quern  dixiinus  Arcades  ohm. 
^gonem  inemora,  vicinas  lintribus  widas 
Qui  iegif,  et  validi  Neptuni  munerefungens^ 
Jngeiites  nojlro  profiigat  littoj'e  pJiocas  : 
Howardum  veteres  fceclo  dixere  priori. 
Denique  tu  Mopfum^  tu  Daphnim^  tu  Alphefcbceum, 
Syluanum^  FauJIum,  et  fapiejitem  inulta  Menalcam^ 
Et  reliquos  numera  padores^  qiiotquot  Elifam 
FeHore  fyncero,  nuUam  pajjlsque  quietei7i 
Luminibus,  vigiles  auido  tutantur  ab  hojie. 
Ambrofios  illi  fijlent  hcec  nominafidus. 

Quales  Oebalij faujlifftma  lumina  fratres^ 
Exhaujlps  pelagi  rabie,  pulfuque  frementum 
^olidum,  grato  tranqtiillant  fydere  nautas, 
Dum  ponunt  venti,  pluuicE  ceduntque  tenebrce  : 
Sic  tuus  6  tandem  (  Cory  don)  peramabilis  aures 
Sermo  meas  mulcens,  exemit  pe^ore  citram^ 
Et  lacrymas  oculis,  et  acerbas  ore  querelas. 

Eccefed  adueniens  fuadet  difcedere  vefper : 
yre  domum  libeat.^  pecudesque  includere  feptis, 
Difcam  paulatim  rigidos  de  difcere  ludlus. 


[A  iV  EG  L  OGVE,    &'c.'[ 


'75 


He  is  Dannvfas,  that  is  wont  to  blame 

extreamefl  iuRice  voide  of  cquitie  : 
Diana  terms  liim  by  an  other  name, 

Hatton^  vnlefle  I  faile  in  memorie. 
The  name  old  Da;no?i,  whom  fliee  knows  of  old 

for  fuch  as  Nejlor  was  to  Grecians  guide  : 
Worth  ten  of  Aiax,  worth  all  Ci-xffiis  gold, 

if  his  deferts  in  ballance  could  be  tride. 
Damon  is  he  that  counfels  flill  aright, 

and  heedfullie  perferus  Dianaes  flore  : 
And  wakes  when  others  refl  them  felus  by  night, 

we  Arcads  cald  him  Cecill  heretofore. 
Then  name  braue  ^gon,  that  with  fhips  defence 

about  our  coafl  orefpreds  the  Ocean  plaines, 
To  keepe  fell  monflers  of  the  fea  from  hence  : 

we  cleape  him  Howard,  that  are  countrie  fwaines. 
Name  Mopfus,  Daj>/mis,  Faustus,  and  the  refl, 

whofe  feurall  gifts  thy  fmging  can  expreffe  : 
When  thou  flialt  tell  how  fliee  in  them  is  bkfl, 

their  verie  names  will  comfort  hir  diflrefle. 

cTitgrus;. 

Cajlor  and  Polhix,  La:daes  louelie  twins, 

whofe  bright  afpedl  cheers  moornful  Mariners, 
Shewing  them  felues  when  pleafant  calme  begins, 

of  gladfome  newes  two  welcome  meffengers, 
Conuey  great  comfort  to  the  weltred  minde, 

and  \\dth  their  Iheen  appearance  breed  delight  : 
Yet  Corydon  thy  leare  and  loue  combinde 

pleafe  more  by  hearing,  then  thofe  twain  by  fight, 
For  they  portending  ftormie  v.indes  furceafe, 

but  by  portendmg  caufe  the  hearts  content : 
Thy  leamd  perfuades  command  my  forrow  ceafe, 

and  fweetnes  doth  allure  to  merriment. 
But  hie  we  homeward,  night  comes  on  apace, 

weel  learne  beliue  forget  our  doleful  notes : 
\   See  where  faire  Venus  fl^ewes  hir  radiant  iace, 

lets  hence,  and  fliut  our  flieepfolds  in  their  coat. 

FINIS. 


THE 

TEARS    OF 


F 


ancie. 


OR, 

Loue  Difdained. 

-£tna  grauius  Amor. 


Printed  at  London  for  William  Barley,  dwel//«^ 

in  Gratious  flreete  ouer  againfl  Leaden 

Hall.     1593. 


M 


Oe  Idle  lines  vnpolifht  rude  and  bafe, 
Vnworthy  words  to  blafon  beauties  glory : 
(Beauty  that  hath  my  reflles  hart  in  chafe, 
Beauty  the  fubiect  of  my  ruefull  flory.) 
I  warne  thee  fhunne  the  bower  of  hei 
abiding, 

Be  not  fo  bold  ne  hardy  as  to  view  her : 
Leaft  fhee  inraged  with  thee  fall  a  chiding, 
And  fo  her  anger  proue  thy  woes  renewer. 
Yet  if  fliee  daigne  to  rew  thy  dreadfull  fmart, 
And  reading  laugh,  and  laughing  fo  miflike  thee : 
Bid  her  defifl,  and  looke  within  my  hart. 
Where  fhee  may  fee  how  ruthles  fhee  did  flrike  mee. 
If  fhee  be  pleafde  though  fhee  reward  thee  not, 
What  others  fay  of  me  regard  it  not. 


Soiuict.  I 

r?N  prime  of  youthly  yeares  as  then  not  wounded, 
With  Loues  impoifoned  dart  or  bitter  gall : 
Nor  minde  nor  thoughts  on  fickle  Fancie  grounded, 
But  carelelTe  hunting  after  pleafures  ball. 
I  tooke  delight  to  laugh  at  Loners  follie, 
Accounting  beautie  but  a  fading  blolTome : 
What  I  efleemd  prophane,  they  deemed  holie, 
loying  the  thraldome  which  I  counted  loathfome. 
Their  plaints  were  fuch  as  no  thing  might  relieue  them, 
Their  harts  did  wellnie  breake  loues  paine  induring  : 
Yet  flill  1  fmild  to  fee  how  loue  did  grieue  them, 
Vnwife  they  were  their  forrowes  felfe  procuring. 
Thus  whilfl  they  honoured  Cupid  for  a  God, 
I  held  him  as  a  boy  not  pafl  the  rod. 

Sonnet.  2. 

yOng  time  I  fought,  and  fiercely  waged  warre, 
'        Againfl  the  God  of  amarous  Defire  : 

Who  fets  the  fenfes  mongfl  themfelues  at  iarre, 
The  hart  inflaming  with  his  luflfull  fire. 
The  wnnged  boy  vpon  his  mothers  knee, 
Wantonlie  playing  neere  to  PapJios  flirine  : 
Scorning  that  1  fliould  checke  his  Deitie, 
VVhofe  dreaded  power  tam'd  the  gods  diuine. 
From  forth  his  quiuer  drew  the  keenefl  dart, 
Wherewith  high  lone  he  oftentimes  had  wounded  : 
And  fiercely  aimd  it  at  my  flubborne  hart, 
But  backe  againe  the  idle  fliaft  rebounded. 
Loue  faw  and  frownd,  that  he  was  fo  beguiled, 
I  laught  outright,  and  Venus  fweetely  fmiled. 

Son\net\  3. 


i8o 

Sonnet.  3. 

^^/"Hee  fmild  to  fee  her  fonne  m  fuch  a  rage, 

1  laught  to  thinke  how  I  had  Loue  preuented  : 
He  frown d  and  vowd  nought  fhould  his  ire  affwage, 
rill  I  had  floopt  to  Loue,  and  loue  repented. 
The  more  he  rag'd  the  greater  grew  our  laughter, 
The  more  we  laught  the  fiercer  was  his  ire  ; 
And  in  his  anger  fware  my  poore  harts  flaughter, 
Which  in  my  breafl  beautie  fliould  fet  on  fire. 
Faire  Venus  feeing  her  deere  fonne  in  chollar. 
Fearing  mifhap  by  his  too  hafly  anger  : 
Perfwaded  him  that  fliee  would  worke  my  dollor. 
And  by  her  meanes  procure  my  endles  langor. 
So  Loue  and  loues  Queene  (Loue  hauing  confented,) 
Agreed  that  I  by  Loue  fliould  be  tormented. 


Sonnet.  4. 
(^  Ho  taking  in  her  lap  the  God  of  loue, 


Shee  lightly  mounted  through  the  Chriflall  aire  : 
^^     And  in  her  Coach  ydrawne  with  filuer  Doues, 
To  'Vulca7is  fmokie  Forge  fliee  did  repaire. 
Where  hauing  wonne  the  Ciclops  to  her  will, 
Loues  quiuer  fraught  with  arrowes  of  the  befl : 
His  bended  bow  in  hand  all  armd  to  kill, 
He  vowd  reuenge  and  threatned  my  vnrefl. 
And  to  be  fure  that  he  would  deadly  flrike  me, 
His  bhndfold  eies  he  did  a  while  vncouer  : 
Choofing  an  arrow  that  fhould  much  miflike  me, 
He  bad  wound  him  that  fcornes  to  be  a  Louer. 
But  when  he  faw  his  booties  arrow  ftiiuer. 
He  brake  his  bow,  and  caft  away  his  quiuer. 

So7tnet.  5. 


iSi 
Sonnet.  5. 

iH^pOpeles  and  helpeles  too,  poore  louc  amated, 
mRI     To  fee  himfelfe  affronted  with  difdaine  ; 
'^-''^^     And  all  his  skill  and  power  fpent  in  vaine, 
At  me  the  onely  obiecfl  that  he  hated. 
Now  Cytherea  from  Olinipus  mount, 
Defcending  from  the  fphere  with  her  deere  fonne  : 
With  Douelike  wings  to  A/cidalyo?i, 
Loue  on  her  knee,  fhee  by  the  Chriflall  fount ; 
Aduifde  the  boy  what  fcandall  it  would  bee. 
If  Fame  fliould  to  the  open  world  difcouer 
How  I  furuiu'd  and  fcornd  Loues  facred  power. 
Then  Cupid  lightly  leaping  from  her  knee, 
Vnto  his  mother  vowd  my  difcontenting  : 
Vnhappie  vowe  the  ground  of  my  lamenting. 

Sonnet.  6. 

Hen  on  the  fodaine  fafl  away  he  fled, 
•^      He  fled  apace  as  from  purfuing  foe : 

Ne  euer  lookt  he  backe,  ne  turnd  his  head. 
Vntill  he  came  whereas  he  wrought  my  woe. 
Tho  cafting  from  his  backe  his  bended  bow. 
He  quickly  clad  himfelfe  in  flrange  difguife : 
In  flrange  difguife  that  no  man  might  him  know. 
So  coucht  himfelfe  within  my  Ladies  eies. 
But  in  her  eies  fuch  glorious  bcames  did  fhine, 
That  welnigh  burnt  loues  party  coloured  wings, 
VVhilfl  I  flood  gazing  on  her  funne-bright  eien. 
The  wanton  boy  fliee  in  my  bofome  flings. 
He  built  his  pleafant  bower  in  my  brefl, 
So  I  in  loue,  and  loue  in  me  doth  reft. 

Son?ict.  7 


l82 

Sonnet.  7. 

'Ow  Loue  triumphed  hauing  got  the  day, 
^W^.     Proudly  infulting,  tyrannizing  flill : 
^        As  Hawke  that  ceazeth  on  the  yeelding  pray, 
So  am  I  made  the  fcorne  of  Vidlors  will. 
Now  eies  with  teares,  now  hart  with  forrow  fraught, 
Hart  forrowes  at  my  watry  teares  lamenting  : 
Eyes  fhed  fait  teares  to  fee  harts  pining  thought, 
And  both  that  then  loue  fcornd  are  now  repenting. 
But  all  in  vaine  too  late  I  pleade  repentance, 
For  teares  in  eies  and  fighs  in  hart  mufl  weeld  me  : 
The  feathered  boy  hath  doomd  my  fatall  fentence, 
That  I  to  tyrannizing  Loue  mufL  yeeld  me. 
And  bow  my  necke  erfl  fubie6t  to  no  yoke, 
To  Loues  falfe  lure  (fuch  force  hath  beauties  flroke.) 

Sonnet.  8. 

What  a  life  is  it  that  Louers  ioy. 
Wherein  both  paine  and  pleafure  fhrouded  is : 
Both  heauenly  pleafures  and  eke  hells  annoy, 
Hells  fowle  annoyance  and  eke  heauenly  bliffe. 
Wherein  vaine  hope  doth  feede  the  Louers  hart, 
And  brittle  ioy  fuflaine  a  pining  thought : 
When  black e  difpaire  renewes  a  Louers  fmart, 
And  quite  extirps  what  firfl  content  had  wrought. 
Where  faire  refemblance  eke  the  mind  allureth, 
To  wanton  lewd  lufl  giuing  pleafure  fcope  : 
And  late  repentance  endles  paines  procureth, 
But  none  of  thefe  afflict  me  faue  vaine  hope. 
And  fad  difpaire,  difpaire  and  hope  perplexing, 
Vaine  hope  my  hart,  difpaire  my  fancie  vexing. 

Sonnet.  9. 


i83 


i84 


>85 


1 86 


.a-jii 


i87 

Sonnet.  17. 

Hen  from  her  fled  my  hart  in  forrow  wrapped. 
Like  \Tito  one  that  (himd  purfuing  flaiighter  : 
All  welnigh  breathles  told  me  what  had  hai)[)ed, 
How  both  in  Court  and  coimtrie  he  had  fought  her. 
The  drerie  teares  of  many  loue  repenting, 
Corriuals  in  my  loue  whom  fancie  flroked  : 
Partners  in  loue  and  partners  in  lamenting, 
My  fellow  thralls  whofe  necks  as  mine  were  yoked. 
The  fhepheards  praifes  and  their  harts  amis, 
Vrged  by  my  Miflres  ouerweening  pride  : 
For  none  that  fees  her  but  captiued  is, 
A.nd  lafl  he  told  which  to  my  hart  did  glide ; 
How  all  the  teares  I  Ipent  were  vaine  and  forceles, 
For  fhee  in  hart  had  vowd  to  be  remorcclcs. 

Sonnet.  18. 

pHo  with  a  fhowre  of  teares  I  entertained, 
My  wounded  hart  into  my  bread  accloied  : 
With  thouiand  fundrie  cares  and  griefes  vnfained, 
Vnfained  griefes  and  cares  my  hart  annoied. 
Annoying  forrowes  at  my  harts  returning, 
Affaild  my  thoughts  with  neuer  ceafmg  horror  : 
That  euen  my  hart,  hart  like  to  ^tna  burning, 
Did  often  times  confpire  for  to  abhorre  her. 
But  enuious  loue  flill  bent  to  eke  my  mourning, 
A  grieuous  pennance  for  my  fault  inflidled  : 
That  eies  fliould  weepe  and  hart  be  euer  groaning ; 
So  loue  to  worke  my  forrowes  was  addidled. 
But  earths  fole  wonder  whofe  eies  m.y  fenfe  appalled. 
The  fault  was  loues,  then  pardon  me,  for  loue  is  franticke 
called.  Sonnet.  19, 


Sonnet.  19. 

J'r  Y  hart  impos'd  this  penance  on  mine  eies, 
(Eies  the  firfl  caul'ers  of  my  harts  lamenting  : 
"^^       That  they  fhould  weepe  till  loue  and  fancie  dies, 
Fond  loue  the  lafl  caufe  of  my  harts  repenting. 
Mine  eies  vpon  my  hart  infli6t  this  paine, 
(Bold  hart  that  dard  to  harbour  thoughts  of  loue) 
That  it  fhould  loue  and  purchafe  fell  difdaine, 
A  grieuous  penance  which  my  hart  doth  proue. 
Mine  eies  did  weepe  as  hart  had  them  impofed, 
My  hart  did  pine  as  eies  had  it  conflrained : 
Eies  in  their  teares  my  paled  face  difclofed, 
Hart  in  his  fighs  did  fhow  it  was  difdained. 
So  th'one  did  weepe  th'other  fighed,  both  grieued, 
For  both  mufl  Hue  and  loue,  both  vnrelieued. 

Sonnet.  20. 
"  Y  hart  accus'd  mine  eies  and  was  offended, 


Vowing  the  caufe  was  in  mine  eies  afpiring  : 

*^-^^      Mine  eies  affirmd  my  hart  might  well  amend  it, 
If  he  at  firft  had  baniiht  loues  defiring. 
Hart  faid  that  loue  did  enter  at  the  eies, 
And  from  the  eies  defcended  to  the  hart : 
Eies  faid  that  in  the  hart  did  fparkes  arife, 
Which  kindled  flame  that  wi'ought  the  inward  fmart, 
Hart  faid  eies  tears  might foonehaue  quencht  that  fl[ame,] 
Eies  faid  harts  fighs  at  firfl  might  loue  exile : 
So  hart  the  eies  and  eies  the  hart  did  blame, 
VVhihl  both  did  pine  for  both  the  paine  did  feele. 
Hart  fighed  and  bled,  eies  wept  and  gaz'd  too  much. 
Yet  mufl  I  gaze  becaufe  I  fee  none  fuch. 

Sonnet.  21 


189 

Somiet  21. 

61?  Ortune  forwearied  with  my  bitter  mone, 

jPJ      Did  pittie  feldome  feene  my  wretched  fate : 

^^^     And  brought  to  pafle  that  I  my  loue  alone.. 

Vnwares  attacht  to  plead  my  hard  eflate. 

Some  fay  that  loue  makes  louers  eloquent, 

And  with  diuinell  wit  doth  them  infpire  : 

But  beautie  my  tongues  office  did  preuent, 

And  quite  extinguiilied  my  hrR  defire. 

As  if  her  eies  had  power  to  flrike  me  dead, 

So  was  I  dafed  at  her  crimfon  die : 

As  one  that  had  beheld  Medufaes  head, 

All  fenfes  failed  their  Mafler  but  the  eie. 

Had  that  fenfe  failed  and  from  me  eke  beene  taken. 

Then  I  had  loue  and  loue  had  me  forfaken. 


Sonnet.  22. 

Saw  the  obiedl  of  my  pining  thought, 
Within  a  garden  of  fweete  natures  placing  : 
Where  in  an  arbour  artificiall  wrought, 
By  workemans  wondrous  skill  the  garden  gracing. 
Did  boafl  his  glorie,  glorie  farre  renowned, 
For  in  his  fhadie  boughs  my  Miflres  flept : 
And  with  a  garland  of  his  branches  crowned. 
Her  daintie  forehead  from  the  funne  ykept. 
Imperious  loue  vpon  her  eielids  tending. 
Playing  his  wanton  fports  at  euery  becke. 
And  into  euerie  fineil  limbe  defcending, 
From  eies  to  lips  from  lips  to  yuorie  necke. 
And  euerie  limbe  fupplide  and  t'euerie  part, 
Had  free  acceffe  but  durfl  not  touch  her  hart. 

Sonnet.  23. 


190 

Sonnet.  23. 

^A^  Ye  me  that  loue  wants  power  to  pierce  the  hart, 


r'X'  JL      Of  my  harts  obie6l  beauties  rareft  wonder  : 
^^^     What  is  become  of  that  hart-thrilHng  dart, 
VVhofe  power  brought  the  heauenly  powers  vnder. 
Ah  gentle  loue  if  empty  be  thy  quiuer, 
Vnmaske  thy  felfe  and  looke  within  my  brefl : 
Where  thou  fhalt  find  the  dart  that  made  me  fhiuer, 
But  can  I  Hue  and  fee  my  loue  diflrefl. 
Ah  no  that  fhaft  was  caufe  of  forrow  endles, 
And  paine  perpetuall  fhould  my  Lady  proue  : 
If  hart  were  pierfl,  the  deare  loue  be  not  friendles, 
Although  I  neuer  found  a  friend  of  loue, 
If  not  without  her  hart,  her  loue  be  gained, 
Let  me  Hue  flill  forlorne  and  die  difdained. 


SoJinet.  24. 

)^fTin  let  me  Hue  forlorne  and  die  difdained, 
My  hart  confenting  to  continuall  languifh  : 
If  loue  (my  harts  fore)  may  not  be  obtained, 
But  with  the  danger  of  my  Ladies  anguifh. 
Let  me  oppofe  my  felfe  gainft  forrowes  force, 
And  arme  my  hart  to  beare  woes  heauy  load : 
Vnpittied  let  me  die  without  remorce. 
Rather  than  monfler  fame  fliall  blafe  abroad ; 
That  I  was  caufer  of  her  woes  induring, 
Or  brought  faire  beauty  to  fo  fowle  a  domage  : 
If  life  or  death  might  be  her  ioyes  procuring, 
Both  life,  loue,  death,  and  all  fliould  doe  her  homage. 
But  fhee  Hues  fafe  in  freedomes  liberty, 
I  Hue  and  die  in  loues  extremitie. 

I  Sonnet.]  25, 


■i> 


191 
Sonnet.  25. 

pHe  prluate  place  which  I  did  choofe  to  waile, 
And  deere  lament  my  loues  pride  was  a  groue : 
Plac'd  twixt  two  hills  within  a  lowlie  dale, 
Which  now  by  fame  was  cald  the  vale  of  loue. 
The  vale  of  loue  for  there  I  fpent  my  plainings, 
Plaints  that  bewTaid  my  ficke  harts  bitter  wounding  : 
Loue  ficke  harts  deepe  wounds  with  difpaire  me  paining, 
The  bordering  hills  my  forrowing  plaints  refounding. 
Each  tree  did  beare  the  figure  of  her  name. 
Which  my  faint  hand  vppon  their  backs  ingraued  : 
And  euery  tree  did  feeme  her  fore  to  blame, 
Calling  her  proud  that  mee  of  ioyes  depraued. 
But  vaine  for  fhee  had  vowed  to  forfake  mee, 
And  I  to  endles  anguifh  mufl  betake  mee. 

Sonnet.  26. 

UtJT  pleafd  my  MiRris  once  to  take  the  aire, 
"yk      Amid  the  vale  of  loue  for  her  difporting  . 

-^      The  birds  perceauing  one  fo  heauenly  faire. 
With  other  Ladies  to  the  groue  reforting. 
Gan  dolefully  report  my  forrowes  endles, 
But  fhee  nill  liflen  to  my  woes  repeating  : 
But  did  protefl  that  I  fliould  forrow  friendle 
So  Hue  I  now  and  looke  for  ioyes  defeating. 
But  ioyfuU  birds  melodious  harmonic, 
Whofe  filuer  tuned  fongs  might  well  haue  moued  her : 
Inforfl  the  refl  to  re  we  my  miferie, 
Though  fhee  denyd  to  pittie  him  that  lou'd  her. 
For  fliee  had  vowd  her  faire  fliould  neuer  pleafe  me. 
Yet  nothing  but  her  loue  can  once  appeafe  me. 

Sonnet.  27. 


ill 


o» 


T92 

Sonnet.  27. 

f^  He  banke  whereon  I  leand  my  reflles  head, 
Placd  at  the  bottome  of  a  mirtle  tree  : 
I  oft  had  watered  with  the  teares  I  flied, 
Sad  teares  did  with  the  fallen  earth  agree. 
Since  when  the  flocks  that  grafe  vpon  the  plaine, 
Doe  in  their  kind  lament  my  woes  though  dumbe : 
And  euery  one  as  faithfull  doth  refraine 
To  eate  that  graffe  which  facred  is  become. 
And  euerie  tree  forbeareth  to  let  fall, 
Their  dewie  drops  mongft  any  brinifh  teares  : 
Onelie  the  mirth*  whofe  hart  as  mine  is  tlirall, 
To  melt  in  forrowes  fourfe  no  whit  forbeare. 
So  franticke  loue  with  griefe  our  paind  harts  wringing. 
That  flill  we  wept  and  flill  the  graffe  was  fpringing. 

Sonnet.  28. 

:  Afl  flowing  teares  from  watery  eies  abounding, 
J   In  tra6l  of  time  by  fon-ow  fo  confl,rained  : 
^=^  And  framd  a  fountaine  in  which  Eccho  founding, 
The'nd  of  my  plaints  (vaine  plaints  of  Loue  difdained.) 
When  to  the  wel  of  mine  owne  eies  weeping, 
I  gan  repaire  renewing  former  greening : 
And  endles  moane  Eccho  me  companie  keeping. 
Her  vnreuealed  woe  my  woe  reuealing. 
My  forrowes  ground  was  on  her  forrow  grounded, 
The  Lad  was  faire  but  proud  that  her  perplexed : 
Her  harts  deepe  wound  was  in  my  hart  deepe  wounded, 
Faire  and  too  proud  is  fhe  that  my  hart  vexed. 
But  faire  and  too  proud  mufl  releafe  harts  pining,  ^ 

Or  hart  mufl  figh  and  burft  with  ioies  declining.  * 

*  ?  myrrh.  SonUet,   29. 


i 


193 
Sonnet.  29. 

P' Aking  a  truce  with  teares  fweete  pleafiires  ibe, 
I  thus  began  hard  by  the  Ibuiitayne  fide  : 
O  deere  copartner  of  my  ^v^etched  woe, 
No  fooner  faide  but  woe  poore  eccho  cride. 
Then  I  againe  what  woe  did  thee  betide, 
That  can  be  greater  than  difdayne,  difdayne : 
Quoth  eccho.     Then  fayd  I  O  womens  pride. 
Pride  anfwered  echo.     O  inflicting  payne, 
When  wofuU  eccho  payne  agayne  repeated, 
Redoubhng  forrow  witli  a  forrowing  found : 
For  both  of  vs  were  now  in  forrow  feated, 
Pride  and  difdaine  difdainefull  pride  the  ground. 
That  forfl  poore  Eccho  mourn e  ay  forrowing  eucr. 
And  me  lament  in  teares  ay  ioyning*  neuer. 

Sonnet.  30. 

SvAYBout  the  well  which  from  mine  eies  did  flow, 
^j^     The  woefull  witnes  of  harts  defolation  : 
^^^^     Yet  teares  nor  woe  nor  ought  could  worke  corn- 
Did  diuers  trees  of  fun  dry  natures  growe.  [paffion, 
The  mirrhe  fweet  bleeding  in  the  latter  wound, 
Into  the  chri flail  wanes  her  teares  did  power : 
As  pittying  me  on  whome  blind  loue  did  lower, 
Vpon  whofe  backe  I  wrote  my  forrows  ground. 
And  on  her  rugged  rind  I  wrote  forlorn e, 
Forlome  I  wrote  for  forrowe  me  opprefled  : 
Oppreffmg  forrowe  had  my  hart  diflreffed, 
And  made  the  abie(fl  outcafl:  of  loues  fcorne. 
The  leaues  confpiring  with  the  winds  fweet  founding, 
With  gentle  murmor  playnd  my  harts  deepe  wounding. 

•  ?ioyinc.  ^'  Son7lct.   3  I, 


194 

Sonnet.  31. 

^T(>^ Wrote  vppon  there  fides  to  eke  their  plaining, 
If  fad  laments  might  multiply  their  forrowe  : 
My  loues  faire  lookes  and  eke  my  loues  difdaining, 
My  loues  coy  lookes  conflraines  me  pine  for  woe. 
My  loues  difdaine  which  was  her  louers  dolour  : 
My  loues  proud  hart  which  my  harts  bliffe  did  banifh : 
My  loues  tranfparent  beames  and  rofy  colour, 
The  pride  of  which  did  caufe  my  ioyes  to  vanifh. 
My  loues  bright  fhining  beeautie  like  the  flarre, 
That  early  rifeth  fore  for  the  funnes  appearance  : 
A  guide  vnto  my  thoughts  that  wandring  arre, 
Doth  force  me  breath  abroad  my  woes  indurance. 
O  life  forlorne,  O  loue  vnkindly  frowning, 
Thy  eies  my  heart  difpaire  my  fad  hope  drowning. 


Sonnet.  32, 

^  Hofe  whofe  kind  harts  fweet  pittie  did  attaint, 
i'Jb      With  ruthfull  teares  bemond  my  miferies  : 
^-^^     Thofe  which  had  heard  my  neuer  ceafmg  plaint, 
Or  read  my  woes  ingrauen  on  the  trees. 
At  laft  did  win  my  Ladie  to  confort  them, 
Vnto  the  fountaine  of  my  flowing  anguifli : 
Where  flie  vnkind  and  they  might  boldly  fport  them, 
YVhilfl  I  meanewhile  in  forrows  lappe  did  languifli, 
Their  meaning  was  that  flie  fome  teares  fliould  flied, 
Into  the  well  in  pitty  of  my  pining  : 
She  gaue  confent  and  putting  forth  her  head. 
Did  in  the  well  perceaue  her  beautie  fliining. 
Which  feeing  flie  withdrew  her  head  puft  vp  with  p^'d 
And  would  not  flied  a  teare  fliould  I  haue  died. 

Sonnet.  33. 


f 


'95 
Soimet.  33. 

>me  fay  that  women  loue  for  to  be  praifed, 
But  droope  when  as  they  thinke  their  faire  mull 
loying  to  haue  their  beauties  glorie  raifed,      [die: 
By  fames  fhril  trompe  aboue  the  flarrie  flvie. 
I  then  whome  want  of  fkill  might  be  with  drawing, 
Extold  her  beautie  not  as  yet  deferued  : 
She  faid  my  words  were  flatterie  and  fayning, 
For  good  intent  to  bad  euent  foone  fwerued. 
Some  fay  againe  they  will  denie  and  take  it, 
I  gaue  my  hart,  my  hart  that  dearly  coft  me  : 
No  fooner  offerd  but  fhe  did  forfake  it. 
Scorning  my  proffered  gift  fo  flill  flie  crofl  me. 
But  were  I  (alas  I  am  not)  falfe  and  truthles  : 
Then  had  flie  reafon  to  be  flerne  and  ruthles. 


Sonnet.  34. 
Hy  Hue  I  ^vretch  and  fee  my  ioyes  decay, 


>@  J® 


Why  Hue  I  and  no  hope  of  loues  aduancing  : 
Why  doe  myne  eies  behold  the  funnie  day, 
Why  Hue  I  ^^Tetch  in  hope  of  better  chancing. 
O  wherefore  tells  my  toung  this  dolefull  tale. 
That  euery  eare  may  heare  my  bitter  plaint : 
Was  neuer  hart  that  yet  bemond  my  bale, 
Why  Hue  I  wretch  my  pangs  in  vaine  to  paint. 
Why  flriue  I  gainfl  the  flreame  or  gainfl  the  hill. 
Why  are  my  forrowes  buried  in  the  duR : 
Why  doe  I  toile  and  loofe  my  labour  flill, 
Why  doe  I  feede  on  hope  or  bild  on  trufl. 
Since  hope  had  neuer  hap  and  trufl  finds  treafon, 
Why  Hue  I  wretch  difdainde  and  fee  no  reafon  ? 

Sonnet.  35 


196 
Sonnet.  35. 

t'Mongfl  the  Idle  toyes  that  toffe  my  brayne, 
And  reaue  my  troubled  mynd  from  quiet  rell :         ^ 
^-^      Vyle  cruell  loue  I  find  doth  flill  remayne,  *> 

To  breede  debate  within  my  grieued  breft. 
When  weary  woe  doth  worke  to  wound  my  will, 
And  hart  furchargd  with  forrow  Hues  opreffed  : 
My  fowlen  eyes  then  cannot  wayle  there  fill, 
Sorrow  is  fo  far  fpent  and  I  diflreffed. 
My  toung  hath  not  the  cunning  fkill  to  tell, 
The  fmalleft  greife  that  gripes  my  throbbing  hart : 
Myne  eies  haue  not  the  fecret  power  to  fwell, 
Into  fuch  hugie  feas  of  wounding  fmart. 
That  will  might  melt  to  wanes  of  bitter  woe, 
And  I  micrht  ivvelt  or  drowne  in  lorrowes  fo. 


Sonnet.  36. 
T  Y  watene  eies  let  fall  no  tricklmg  teares, 


^ But  flouds  that  ouer  flow  abundantly  : 

'^"-^      V  Vhofe  fpring  and  fountaine  firft  inforfl  by  feares, 

Doth  drowne  my  hart  in  wanes  of  mifery. 

My  voice  is  like  vnto  the  raging  wind. 

Which  roareth  flill  and  neuer  is  at  refl : 

The  diuers  thoughts  that  tumble  in  my  minde, 

Are  reftleffe  like  the  wheele  that  wherles  alway. 

The  fmokie  fighes  that  boyle  out  of  my  brefl,, 

Are  farre  vnlike  to  thole  which  others  vfe : 

For  Loners  fighes  fometimes  doe  take  their  refl. 

And  lends  their  minds  a  little  fpace  to  mufe. 

But  mine  are  like  vnto  the  furging  leas. 

Whom  tempefl  calme  nor  quiet  can  appeafe. 

So7!?ia'.  37. 


197 
Sonnet.  37. 

Here  may  I  now  my  carefull  corps  conuay, 
^'i    From  company  the  worker  of  my  woe  : 
*^^    How  may  I  winke  or  hide  mine  eies  ahvaies, 
\^Vhich  gafe  on  that  whereof  my  griefe  doth  growe, 
ITow  fhall  I  feeme  my  fighes  for  to  fuppreffe, 
\' Vhich  helpe  the  hart  which  elfe  would  fwelt  in  funder, 
X'Vliich  hurts  the  helpe  that  makes  my  torment  leffe  : 
Which  helps  and  hurts,  O  woefull  wearie  wonder, 
How  now,  but  thus  in  folitarie  wife  : 
To  Rep  afide  and  make  hie  waie  to  moane, 
To  make  two  fountaines  of  my  dafled  eies, 
To  figh  my  fill  till  breath  and  all  be  gone. 
To  die  in  forrow  and  in  woe  repent  me, 
'i'hat  loue  at  lafl  would  though  too  late  lament  me. 

Sonnet.  38. 

Would  my  loue  although  too  late  lament  mee, 
And  pitty  take  of  teares  from  eies  diflilling  : 
To  beare  thefe  foiTOwes  well  I  could  content  me, 
And  ten  times  more  to  fuffer  would  be  willing. 
If  (he  would  daine  to  grace  me  with  her  fauour, 
The  thought  thereof  fuflained  greife  fliould  banifh  : 
And  in  beholding  of  her  rare  behauiour, 
A  fmyle  of  her  fhould  force  difpaire  to  vanifhe : 
But  fhe  is  bent  to  tiran[i]ze  vpon  me, 
Difpaire  perfwades  there  is  no  hope  to  haue  her : 
My  hart  doth  whifper  I  am  woe  begone  me, 
Then  ceafe  my  vaine  plaints  and  defiil  to  craue  her. 
Here  end  my  forrowes  here  my  fait  teares  flint  I, 
For  flies  obdurate,  flerne,  remorfeles,  fiintie. 

Sonnet.  39. 


198 
Sonnet.  39. 

f'Eere  end  my  forrow,  no  here  my  forrow  fpringeth, 
^^1^     Here  end  my  woe,  no  here  begins  my  waihng  : 
^-^~^     Here  ceafe  my  griefe,  no  here  my  griefe  deepe 
Sorrow,  woe,  griefe,  nor  ought  elfe  is  auaiUng.   [wringeth 
Here  ceafe  my  teares,  no  here  begins  eies  weeping, 
Here  end  my  plaints,  no  here  begins  my  pining : 
Here  hart  be  free,  no  fighes  in  hart  ftill  keeping, 
Teares,  plaints,  and  fighes,  all  caiife  of  ioyes  declining. 
Here  end  my  loue,  no  here  doth  loue  infpire  me, 
Here  end  my  life,  no  let  not  death  defire  me, 
Loue,  hope,  and  life,  and  all  with  me  mufl  perifh. 
For  forrow,  woe,  giiefe,  teares,  and  plaints  oft  plained, 
Sighes,  loue,  hope,  life,  and  I,  mufL  die  dildained. 


Sonnet.  40. 

Wp  He  common  loye,  the  cheere  of  compame, 

)  jfc)    Twixt  myrth  and  mone  doth  plague  me  euermore : 

For  pleafant  talke  or  muficks  melodie, 
Yelds  no  fuch  falue  vnto  my  fecret  lore. 
For  flill  I  Hue  in  fpight  of  cruell  death. 
And  die  again e  in  fpight  of  lingring  life  : 
Feede  flill  with  hope  which  doth  prolong  my  breath. 
But  choackt  with  feare  and  flrangled  flill  with  flriie, 
VVitnes  the  dales  which  I  in  dole  confume, 
And  weary  nights  beare  record  of  my  woe  : 
O  wronge  full  world  which  makfl  my  fancie  fume, 
Fie  fickle  Fortune  fie  thou  art  my  foe. 
O  heauie  hap  fo  froward  is  my  chance. 
No  daies  nor  nights  nor  worlds  can  me  aduance. 

Sonnet.  41. 


199 
Sonnet.  41. 

T^Mperious  loue  who  in  the  prime  of  youth, 
^-J^      I  light  efleemed  as  an  idle  toy  : 

Though  late  thy  fierie  dart  hath  caufd  my  ruth, 
And  turned  fweet  happines  to  darke  annoy. 
Why  haft  thou  pleafure  in  my  harts  deepe  groning, 
And  doft  not  rew  and  pittie  my  vexations  ? 
Why  hafl  thou  ioy  at  my  laments  and  moning, 
And  art  not  moued  at  my  imprecations  ? 
Why  haft  thou  ftroke  my  hart  with  fwift  defire, 
And  perft  my  Ladies  eies  with  fell  difdaine? 
Why  hath  fond  fancie  fet  my  thoughts  on  fire, 
And  pent  my  hart  in  prifon  of  fad  paine? 
Why  am  I  drownd  in  dolors  neuer  ceafing, 
My  ioies  ftill  fading,  and  my  woes  increafing. 

Sonnet.  42. 

^7  Thou  that  ruleft  in  Ramnis  golden  gate, 
Let  pittie  pierce  the  vnrelenting  mind  : 
Vnlade  me  of  the  burthen  cruell  fate, 
(Fell  enuious  fates  too  cruell  and  vnkind) 
Haue  heapt  vpon  me  by  too  froward  loue, 
Too  froward  loue  the  enemie  of  fortune : 
Whofe  fierce  affaults  my  hart  (too  late)  did  proue. 
My  fillie  hart  which  forrow  did  importune. 
Yet  in  thy  power  is  my  harts  redeeming, 
My  harts  redeeming  from  vile  thraldomes  force: 
Vile  thrall  to  one  my  forrowes  not  efteeming. 
Though  fhee  be  cmell  yet  haue  thou  remorce. 
Be  thou  to  me  no  more  inconftant  variable. 
But  let  thy  fickle  wheele  reft  firme  and  ftable. 

Sonnet.  4^. 


200 

Sonnet.  43. 

wTrSOng  haue  I  fwome  againft  the  wifhed  waue, 
VJ^      But  now  conftrained  by  a  lothfome  life  : 
^"^     I  greedilie  doe  feeke  the  greedie  graue, 
To  make  an  end  of  all  thefe  flormes  and  flrife. 
Sweete  death  giue  end  to  my  tormenting  woes, 
And  let  my  paffions  penetrate  thy  brefl : 
Suffer  my  heart  which  doth  fuch  griefes  inclofe 
By  timelie  fates  inioie  eternall  reft. 
Let  me  not  dwell  in  dole  fith  thou  maift  eafe  me, 
Let  me  not  languifh  in  fuch  endles  durance  : 
One  happie  ftroke  of  thy  fad  hand  will  pleafe  me, 
Pleafe  me  good  death  it  is  thy  procurance. 
To  end  my  harts  griefe  (heart  fliee  did  abhorre  thee) 
O  haft  thee  gentle  death  I  linger  for  thee. 

Sonnet.  44. 

(|Tf50ng  haue  I  fued  to  fortune  death  and  loue, 
'^%A   But  fortune,  loue,  nor  death  will  daine  to  hear  me: 
^-^  I  fortunes  frowne,  deaths  fpight,  loues  horror  proue. 
And  muft  in  loue  difpairing  Hue  I  feare  me. 
Loue  wounded  me,  yet  nill  recure  my  wounding, 
And  yet  my  plaints  haue  often  him  inuoked  : 
Fortune  hath  often  heard  my  forrowes  founding, 
Sorrowes  which  my  poore  hart  haue  welnigh  choked. 
Death  well  might  haue  beene  moued  when  I  lamented, 
But  cruell  death  was  deafe  when  I  complained : 
Death,  loue,  and  fortune  all  might  haue  relented. 
But  fortune,  loue,  and  death,  and  all  difdained. 
To  pittie  me  or  eafe  my  reftles  minde. 
How  can  they  choofe  fmce  they  are  bold  and  blinde. 

Sonnet.  45. 


roi 

Sonnet.  45. 

i^f-TTHen  neither  fighs  nor  forrowes  were  offeree 
WiV     I  let  my  Miflres  fee  my  naked  brefl : 
^^■"^    Where  view  of  wounded  hart  might  worke  re- 
And  moue  her  mind  to  pittie  my  vnrefl..  [morce, 

With  fledfafl.  eie  fliee  gazed  on  my  hart, 
Wherein  (hee  faw  the  pi(fture  of  her  beautie  : 
Which  hailing  feene  as  one  agafl  fhee  flart, 
Accufmg  all  my  thoughts  with  breach  of  duetie. 
As  if  my  hart  had  robd  her  of  her  faire, 
No,  no,  her  faire  bereaud  my  hart  of  ioy : 
And  fates  difdaine  hath  kild  me  with  difpaire, 
Difpaire  the  fountaine  of  my  fad  annoy. 
And  more,  c^las,  a  cruell  one  I  ferued, 
Left  loucd  of  her  whofe  loue  I  mofl  deferued. 


Soiinet.  46. 

^\|[;  Y  MiRres  feeing  her  faire  counterfet 
i\jSi^      So  fweetelie  framed  in  my  bleeding  brefl : 
'^'^       On  \i  her  fancie  fliee  fo  firmelie  fet, 
Thinking  her  felfe  for  want  of  it  diflrefl. 
Enuying  that  anie  fliould  inioy  her  Image, 
Since  all  vnworthie  were  of  fuch  an  honor  : 
Tho  gan  fhee  me  command  to  leaue  my  gage, 
The  firfl  end  of  my  ioy,  lafl  caufe  of  dolor. 
But  it  fo  fafl  was  fixed  to  my  hart. 
loind  with  vnfeparable  fweete  commixture, 
That  nought  had  force  or  power  them  to  part : 
Here  take  my  hart  quoth  I,  with  it  the  picflure, 
But  oh  coy  Dame  intollerable  fmart. 
Rather  then  touch  my  hart  or  come  about  it, 
She  tumd  her  face  and  chofe  to  goe  without  it. 

Sonnet.  47. 


202 

Sonnet.  47. 

lEhold  deare  Miftres  how  each  pleafant  greene, 
^^^     Will  now  renew  his  fommers  liuerie  : 

The  fragrant  flowers  which  haue  not  long  beene  feene, 
Will  floiirifli  now  ere  long  in  brauerie. 
But  I  alas  within  whofe  mourning  mind, 
The  grafts  of  griefe  are  onelie  giuen  to  grow  : 
Cannot  inioy  the  fpring  which  others  find, 
But  flill  my  wnll  mufl  wither  all  in  woe. 
The  luftie  ver  that  whilome  might  exchange, 
My  griefe  to  ioy,  and  my  delight  increafe  : 
Springs  now  elfe  where  and  fhowes  to  me  but  flrange, 
My  winters  woe  therefore  can  neuer  ceafe. 
In  other  coafts  his  funne  doth  clearely  fhine, 
And  comfort  lend  to  euery  mould  but  mine. 


Sonnet.  48. 

(5p  He  tender  buds  whom  cold  hath  long  kept  in, 
)  X\      And  winters  rage  inforfl  to  hide  their  head  : 
^-^^     Will  fpring  and  fprowt  as  they  doe  now  begin, 
That  euerie  one  will  ioy  to  fee  them  fpread. 
But  cold  of  care  fo  nips  my  ioies  at  roote. 
There  is  no  hope  to  recouer  what  is  loft : 
No  funne  doth  fhine  that  well  can  doe  it  boote. 
Yet  flill  I  ftriue  but  loofe  both  toile  and  coft. 
For  what  can  fpring  that  feeles  no  force  of  ver. 
What  hower  can  flourifh  where  no  funne  doth  fhine  : 
Thefe  balles  deare  loue,  within  my  brefl  I  beare. 
To  breake  my  barke  and  make  my  pith  to  pine. 
Needs  mufl  I  fall,  I  fade  both  root  and  rinde, 
My  branches  bowe  at  blafl  of  euerie  winde. 

So7t7iet.  49. 


20 


Sonnet.  49. 

Jaua  and  her  nimphs  in  filuane  biooke, 
Did  waHi  themfelues  in  fecret  farre  apart : 
But  bold  Adam  dard  on  them  to  looke, 

For  which  faire  Phoebe  turnd  him  to  a  Hart. 

His  hounds  vnweeting  of  his  fodaine  change, 

Did  hale  and  pull  him  downe  with  open  crie  : 

He  then  repenting  that  he  I'o  did  range, 

Would  fpeake  but  could  not,  fo  did  figh  and  die. 

But  my  Diana  fairer  and  more  cruel, 

Bereft  me  of  my  hart  and  in  difdaine  : 

Hath  turnd  it  out  to  feede  on  fancies  fuel, 

And  Hue  in  bondage  and  eternal  paine. 

So  hartlcs  doe  I  liue  yet  cannot  die, 

Defire  the  dog,  doth  chafe  it  to  and  fro : 

Vnto  her  brefl  for  fuccour  it  doth  flie, 

If  fliee  debarre  it  whither  fliall  it  go. 

Now  Hues  my  hart  in  danger  to  be  flaine, 

Vnlefle  her  hart  my  hart  wil  entertaine. 

Sonnet,  so. 

l'j;yAnd,  hart  and  eie,  tucht  thought  and  did  behold, 
The  onelie  glorie  that  on  earth  doth  grow : 
Hand  quakt,  hart  fighd,  but  eie  was  foolifh  bold, 

To  gaze  til  gazing  ^vrought  harts  grounded  woe. 

The  obie6l  of  thefe  fenfes  heauenlie  faint, 

With  fuch  a  maieflie  did  me  appall  : 

As  hand  to  write  her  praife  did  feare  and  faint, 

And  heart  did  bleede  to  thinke  me  Beauties  thrall. 

But  eie  more  hardie  than  the  hand  or  hart, 

Did  glorie  in  her  eies  reflecting  light : 

\nd  yet  that  light  did  breede  my  endles  fmart. 

\nd  yet  mine  eies  nill  leaue  there  former  fight. 

But  gazing  pine,  which  eie,  hand,  hart  doth  trie, 

And  what  I  loue,  is  but  hand,  hart,  and  eie. 

Sonnet.  5 1 . 


f 


204 
So7inet.  51. 

&ra' Ach  tree  did  boafl  the  wifhed  fpring  times  pride, 

ylw.     When  foHtarie  in  the  vale  of  loue  : 

^=^     I  hid  my  felfe  fo  from  the  world  to  hide, 

The  vncouth  paffions  which  my  hart  did  proue. 

No  tree  whofe  branches  did  not  brauelie  fpring 

No  branch  whereon  a  fine  bird  did  not  fit : 

No  bird  but  did  her  fhrill  notes  fweetelie  fing, 

No  fong  but  did  containe  a  louelie  dit. 

Trees,  branches,  birds,  and  fongs  were  framed  faire. 

Fit  to  allure  fraile  minde  to  careles  eafe  : 

But  carefull  was  my  thought,  yet  in  difpaire, 

I  dwelt,  for  brittle  hope  me  cannot  pleafe. 

For  when  I  view  my  loues  faire  eies  reflecting, 

T  entertaine  difpaire,  vaine  hope  reie6ting. 

Sonnet.  52. 

'Ach  Creature  ioyes  AppoUos  happie  fight,        [ing 
And  feede  them  felues  with  his  fayrebeamesreflect- 
Nyght  wandering  trauelers  at  Cinthias  fight, 
Clere  vp  their  clowdy  thoughts  fond  fere  reieding 
But  darke  difdayne  eclipfed  hath  my  fun, 
Whofe  fhining  beames  my  wandering  thought  were 
For  want  whereof  my  litle  worlde  is  done         [guiding. 
That  I  vnneath  can  flay  my  mind  from  Aiding, 
O  happie  birds  that  at  your  pleafure  maie  : 
Behold  the  glorious  light  of  fols  a  raies, 
Mofl  wretched  I  borne  in  fome  difmall  daie  : 
That  cannot  fee  the  beames  my  fun  difplaies. 
My  glorious  fun  in  whome  all  vertue  Ihrowds, 
That  light  the  world  but  fhines  to  me  in  clowds. 

Sojuict.  53. 


205 

Sonnet.  53. 

uT?N  Clowdes  fhe  fliines  and  fo  obfciirely  fhineth, 

^jb\      That  like  a  maRles  fliipe  at  feas  I  wander  : 

^-^      For  want  of  her  to  guide  my  hart  that  pineth, 

Yet  can  I  not  entreat  ne  yet  command  her. 

So  am  I  tied  in  Laborinths  of  fancy, 

In  darke  and  obfcure  Laborinths  of  lone  : 

That  euerie  one  may  plaine  behold  that  can  lee, 

How  I  am  fetterd  and  what  paines  I  proue. 

The  Lampe  whofe  light  fhould  lead  my  fhip  about, 

Is  placed  vpon  my  Miflres  heauenlie  face. 

Her  hand  doth  hold  the  clew  mufl  lead  me  out. 

And  free  my  hart  from  thraldom es  lothed  place. 

But  cleane  to  lead  me  out  or  Lampe  to  light  me, 

She  fcornefullie  denide  the  more  to  ipight  me. 


Sonnet.  54. 

if^Lame  me  not  deere  loue  though  I  talke  at  randon. 
ri5  Terming  thee  fcomefull,  proud,  vnkind,  difdaineful 
^ — ^  Since  all  I  doe  cannot  my  woes  abandon, 
Or  ridde  me  of  the  yoake  I  feele  fo  painefull. 
If  I  doe  paint  thy  pride  or  want  of  pittie, 
Confider  likewife  how  I  blafe  thy  beautie  : 
Inforced  to  the  firfl  in  mournefull  dittie, 
Conflrained  to  the  lafl  by  feruile  dutie  : 
And  take  thou  no  offence  if  I  mifdeemed. 
Thy  beauties  glorie  quencheth  thy  prides  blemifli : 
Better  it  is  of  all  to  be  efleemed, 
Faire  and  too  proud  than  not  faire  and  too  fquemifhe. 
And  feeing  thou  mufl  fcorne  and  tis  aprooued, 
Scome  to  be  ruthles  fmce  thou  art  beloued. 

Soiiiie\t\  55. 


2o6 
Sonnet.  55. 
^  T  Y  loue  more  bright  than  Cinthias  homed  head, 


iuMI      That  fpreads  her  wings  to  beautifie  the  heauens : 

'^--'  ^      When  Titan  coucheth  in  his  purple  bed, 

Thou  huell  by  Titan  and  inioiefl  his  beamcs. 

Shee  flies  when  he  begins  to  run  his  race, 

And  hides  her  head  his  beautie  ftaines  her  brightnes : 

Thou  ftaieft  thy  beautie  yeelds  the  funne  no  place, 

For  thou  excelil  his  beames  in  glories  fweetnes. 

Shee  hath  eclips,  thou  neuer  doefl  eclips, 

Shee  fometimes  wanes  thy  glorie  dill  doth  waxe  : 

None  but  Endymyon  hangeth  at  her  lips, 

Thy  beautie  burnes  the  world  as  fire  doth  flaxe. 

Shee  fhines  by  months,  thou  houres,  months,  and  yeares. 

Oh  that  fiich  beautie  fhould  inforce  fuch  teares. 


iATxlTEre  words  diflblued  to  fighs,  fighs  mto  teares, 
WAt/     And  euerie  teare  to  torments  of  the  mind  : 


Sonnet.  56 
rEre  words  di 

o^_^      The  minds  diflreffe  into  thofe  deadly  feares, 
That  find  more  death  than  death  it  felfe  can  find. 
Were  all  the  woes  of  all  the  world  in  one. 
Sorrow  and  death  fet  downe  in  all  their  pride : 
Yet  were  they  infufficient  to  beriione, 
The  reftles  horrors  that  my  hart  doth  hide. 
Where  blacke  difpaire  doth  feede  on  euerie  thought, 
And  deepe  difpaire  is  caufe  of  endles  griefe  : 
Where  euerie  fenfe  with  forrowes  ouer-wrought, 
Lines  but  in  death  difpairing  of  reliefe. 
Whilft  thus  my  heart  with  loues  plague  torne  afunder. 
May  of  the  world  be  cald  the  wofuU  wonder. 

Sonnet.  57. 


13' 


2o7 

Sonnet.  57. 

He  hunted  Hare  fometime  doth  leaiie  the  Hound, 
."^      My  Hart  alas  is  neuer  out  of  chace  : 

The  liue-hounds  Hfe  fometime  is  yet  vnbound, 
My  bands  are  hopeles  of  fo  high  a  grace. 
For  natures  fickencs  fometimes  mav  haue  eafe, 
Fortune  though  fickle  fometime  is  a  friend  : 
The  minds  affliction  patience  may  appeafe, 
And  death  is  caufe  that  many  torments  end. 
Yet  I  am  ficke,  but  fliee  that  fliould  reflore  me, 
YA'ithholds  the  facred  blame  that  would  recure  me  : 
And  fortune  eke  (though  many  eyes  deplore  me,) 
Nill  lend  fuch  chance  that  might  to  ioy  procure  me. 
Patience  wants  power  to  appeafe  my  weeping. 
And  death  denies  what  I  haue  long  beene  feeking. 

Sonnet.  58. 

i\f-T;7Hen  as  I  marke  the  loy  of  euery  wight,    [ceafeth 
vYy/    Howe  in  their  mindes  deepe  throbbing  forrow 
And  by  what  meanes  they  nourifli  their  delight, 
Their  fweet  delight  my  paine  the  more  increafeth. 
For  as  the  Deare  that  fees  his  fellow  feede, 
Amid  the  luRy  heard,  himfelfe  fore  brufed  : 
Or  as  the  bird  that  feeles  her  felfe  to  bleede, 
And  lies  aloofe  of  all  her  pheeres  refufed. 
So  haue  I  found  and  now  too  deerely  trie, 
That  pleafure  doubleth  paine  and  bliffe  annoy  : 
Yet  flill  I  twit  my  felfe  of  Surcuidrie, 
As  one  that  am  vnworthy  to  inioy. 
The  lafling  fnite  of  fuch  a  heaucnly  loue, 
For  whom  thefe  cndles  forrowes  I  approue. 

So/nid.  59. 


2o8 

Sonnet.  59. 

Ft  haue  I  ralld  againfl  loue  many  v;aies, 
But  pardon  loue  I  honour  now  thy  power : 
For  were  my  Pallace  Greece  Pyramides, 
Cupid  fhould  there  ere6l  a  ftately  bower. 
And  in  my  Pallace  fmg  his  fugred  fongs, 
And  IJeniis  Doues  my  felfe  will  finely  feede  : 
And  nurce  her  fparrowes  and  her  milke  white  Swans. 
Yea,  in  my  reflles  bofome  fhould  they  breede. 
And  thou  deare  Ladie  facred  and  diuine, 
Shalt  haue  thy  place  within  my  hart  affignd  : 
Thy  pi6lure  yea  thy  fierie  darting  eien, 
He  carrie  painted  in  my  grieued  mind. 
The  chiefefl  coullers  fhall  be  fcarlet  blood, 
Which  Cupid  pricketh  from  my  wofull  hart : 
And  teares  commixt  fhall  further  forth  my  good, 
To  paint  thy  glories  cording  their  defart. 
I  now  am  changed  from  what  I  woont  to  be, 
Cupid  is  God,  And  there  is  none  but  he. 


So7tnet.6o.    ■   l-^" 


r3 


/o4 


o. 


Ho  taught  thee  firft  to  figh  Alaffe  fweet  heart  ?  /oue. 
7TXT^    Who  taught  thy  tongue  to  marfhall  words 


W 

*-^-^         of  plaint  ?  /oue. 

Who  fild  thine  eies  with  teares  of  bitter  fmart  ?        /otie. 

Who  gaue  thee  griefe  and  made  thy  ioyes  fo  faint?  /o?^e. 

Who  firfl  did  paint  with  coullers  pale  thy  face?        /oue. 

Who  firfl  did  breake  thy  fleepes  of  quiet  reft  ?  /oue. 

Who  forfl  thee  vnto  wanton  loue  giue  place  ?  /oue. 

Who  thrald  thy  thoughts  in  fancie  fo  diftrefL  ?  /o?/e. 

Who  made  thee  bide  both  confLant  firme  and  fure.    /oue. 

Who  made  thee  fcorne  the  world  and  loue  thy  friend?  /oue. 

Who  made  thy  mind  with  patience  paines  indure  ?  /oue. 

Who  made  thee  fettle  ftedfafl  to  the  end.  /oue. 

Then  loue  thy  choice  though  loue  be  neuer  gained, 
Still  Hue  in  loue,  difpaire  not  though  difdained. 

FINIS.      T.    JV. 


3Bit0li^t  2^cpniU^« 


WILLIAM     HABINGTON 


Castara. 


The  Third  Edition  of  1640;  Edited  and 
Collated  with  the  Earlier  ones  of  1634,  1635. 

BY 

I^:  D  \V  A  R  D     A  K  H  V.  R. 

Affociate,  King's  College,  London,  F.R.G.S.,  &*€. 


LONDON;: 
5  gUKEiN   SQUARE,    HL(KJMSHUK\',  W.C. 
Mnt.  Sint.  Hall.]  I  October,  1 870.  [All Rights  re/trved. 


CONTENTS. 


Introduction, 

Bibliography,  with  First  Lines,  etc.,  of  the  three  firfl 
editions,  fhowing  the  growth  of  the  work, 

CASTARA.    The  firfl  Part, 


(i)  The  Author, 

(2)  George  Talbot,  To  his  befb  friend  and  Kinfman 

William  Habijtgton,  Esquire, 

(3)  A  Character.     A  Mijirefs,  .... 

(4)  Fifty-seven  Poems,  chiefly  on  Love  and  Courtfhip 

CASTARA.     The  fecond  Part,      . 
(i)  A  Character.     A  Wife,        .... 

(2)  Fifty  Poems,  chiefly  on  Wedded  Happiness,  . 

(3)  A  Character.     A  Friend,     .... 

(4)  Eight  Elegies,   The  Funerals  of  the  Honoiirahle  my 

befl  friend  and  Kiitfman,  George  Talbot,  Efquire, 

C  A  STAR  A.     The  third  Part, 

(1)  A  Character.     A  Holy  Man, 

(2)  Twenty-two  Poems,  chiefly  Sacred,  with  Scripture 

Texts,     .         ....... 


PAGE 

3 


9 
II 

14 

17 

55 
57 
59 
99 

lOI 

III 
112 

"5 


INTR  on  UCTJON. 


Tie  old  English  family  of  Habingdon,  Abingdon,  HABiNnTC-.;, 
or  Abington  traced  their  pedigree  beyond  the  reign  of  Henry 
III.,  to  Philip  de  Habington,  of  Abingdon,  co.  Canibrid.tje; 
but  that  branch  of  the  family  from  which  our  Poet  sprang, 
descended  from  Richard  Habington,  of  Brokhampton,  whose 
third  s>on  John  was  coifVerer  to  Queen  Elizabeth.  This  John 
Habington,  our  Poet's  grandfather,  bought  Hindlip  Hall,  an  estate  beau- 
tifully situated  about  four  miles  from  Worcester.  He  married  twice.  By  his 
second  wife  he  had  two  sons,  Thomas;  and  Edward,  who  was  executed  for 
Babington's  pi  >t  in  1586. 

Anthony-a- Wood  gives  this  account  of  Thomas  Habington.  He  'was 
born  at  Thorpe  ne.ir  to  Chertsey  in  Surrey,  on  the  23  Aug.  1560,  (at  which 
time  and  before  the  manor  thereof  belonged  to  his  father^  and  at  about  16 
years  of  age  he  became  a  conunoner  of  Lincoln  Coll.  Where  spending  about 
three  years  iii  academicall  studies,  was  taken  thence  by  his  fcither  and  sent 
to  the  universities  of  Paris  and  Rheimes  in  France.  After  some  time  spent 
there  in  good  letters,  he  return'd  into  England,  and  expressing  and  shewii^g 
himself  an  adherent  to  Mary  qu.  of  Scots  (who  plotted  with  Anth.  Babington 
against  qu.  Elizabeth'  was  committed  prisoner  to  the  Tower  of  London, 
where  continuing  six  years,  he  profited  more  in  that  time  in  several  sorts  of 
learning,  then  he  had  before  in  all  his  life.  Afterwards  he  retired  to  Hendlip 
the  manor  of  which  his  father  had  setlcd  upon  him^  took  to  wife  Mary  the 
eldest  daughter  of  Edward  lord  Morley  by  Elizabeth  his  wife,  daughter  and 
sole  heir  of  Sir  William  Stanley  knight,  lord  Mounteagle  ;  and  at  riper  years 
survey'd  Worcestershire,  made  a  collection  of  most  of  its  antiquities  from 
records,  registers,  evidences  both  priv.ite  and  public,  monumental  inscriptions 

and  arms At  length,  after  he  had  lived  to  the  age  of  87  years,  sur- 

rendred  up  his  pious  soul  to  God  at  Hendlip  near  Worcester  on  the  8th 
October  1647,  and  was  buried  by  his  father  in  a  vault  under  the  chancel  of 
the  church  there.'     Atk.  Oxoti.  iii.  222.     Ed.  1817. 

Hindlip  Hall  was  full  of  lurking  places.  T.  Na.sh  in  his  Hist.  oflVorc.  i. 
585-7,  gives  a  transcript  of  AshiiioWs  MSS.  Vol.  804,  fol.  93.  at  Oxford  : 
which  is  a  most  graphic  description  of  a  search,  Jbr  eievefi  nights  and  tiveh<e 
days,  in  Jan.  1605,  througn  the  house  :  wherein  Garnettthe  Jesuit  and  others 
were  discovered,  who  were  afterwards  executed. 

2.     Thomas  Habington    =     Mary  Parker,  d.  of  Lord  Morley. 

[Mary  Habington  is  said  to  have  written  the 
letter  revealing  the  Gunpowder  Plot  ] 


b.  1560 — d.  1647.  act.  87. 


William   =Llcv Herbert,  d.       Marv=W.  Compton.      and  other 
b.i6o5-d.i654.  I     Lord  Powis.  I  children. 


I  I  W.  Compton.  d.  1731, 

Thomas.       CATHERiNE=Osborne.     madeaBai-t.  6  May 
d.  unma'^ried.  I  1686. 

He  left  Hindlip  | 

esute  to  Sir  W.  1  1 

Compton,  Bart.  Lucy.       Eleanor. 

3.  Wood's  account  of  our  Poet  is  perhaps  the  most  authentic.  "  William 
Habington,  was  born  at  Herdlip,  on  the  fourth  [So  have  I  been  instructed 
by  letters  from  his  son  Tho.  Habington  escj.  :  dated  5  Jan.  1672.]  (some  sny 
the  fifth)  day  of  November  1605,  educated  in  S.  Omcrs  and  Paris;  in  the  first 
of  which  he  was  earnestly  invited  to  take  upon  him  the  habit  of  the  Jesuits, 
but  by  excuses  got  free  and  left  them.  After  his  return  from  Paris,  being 
then  at  man's  estate,  he  was  instructed  at  home  in  matters  of  history  by  his 
father,  and  became  an  accomplished  gentleman This  person,  \\'ill. 


4  Introdnclion. 

fribing-ton,  who  did  then  run  with  the  times,  and  was  not  unknown  [what 
does  Wood  mean  by  this?]  to  Oliver  the  usurper,  died  on  the  30th  of  Nov- 
ember 1654,  and  was  buried  in  the  vault  before-mentioned  by  the  bodies  of 
his  father  and  grand-father.  The  MSS.  which  he  (and  his  father)  left  be- 
hind, are  in  the  hands  of  his  son  Thomas,  and  might  be  made  useful  for  the 
public,  if  in  others." — Ath.  Oxon.  Hi.  223.  Ed.  1817. 

4.  The  Habingtons  were  connected  with  the  Talbots  through  the  above 
Richard  Habington's  second  son  Richard  Habington,  whose  grand- 
daughter Eleanor  Baskerville  married  John  Talbot  of  Longdon  :  and 
became  the  mother  of  (i)  John,  Lord  Talbot  loth  Earl  of  Shrewsbury,  who 
succeeded  his  bachelor  uncle  George  Talbot,  the  9th  Earl  (lamented  by 
our  Poet  at/.  77)  on  his  death,  2d  April  1630:  (2)  of  George  Talbot,  our 
author's  bosom  friend,  who  died  young  and  unmarried  :  and  of  other  children. 

5.  The  second  son  of  the  Earl  of  Pembroke,  Sir  William  Herbert, 
was  created  on  2d  April  1629,  ist  Baron  Powis.  He  had  three  children  by 
Eleanor,  youngest  "daughter  of  Henry  Percy,  lothEarl  of  Northumber- 
land, Sir  Percy  Herbert,  Catherine  Herbert,  and  Lucy  Herbert. 
This  Lucy  Herbert  is  Castara. 

6.  A  concurrence  of  allusions  would  seem  to  fix  Habington's  marriage  with 
Lucy  Herbert,  between  1630  and  1633  :  later  than  which  it  cannot  be  :  as  the 
anniversary  of  his  wedding  day  is  celebrated  in  verse,  at/.  80.  Most  of  the 
poems  relate  to  '  those  of  my  blood 

And  my  Castara' s.' 
There  is  in  their  arrangement,  a  slight  thread  of  continuity.  We  are  to  realize 
the  young  Englishman,  of  good  family,  possibly  not  unhandsome,  wooing — 
with  a  culture  and  grace  acquired  in  France — the  young  English  beauty ; 
possibly  under  some  disadvantage,  being  neither  possessed  of  high  station 
nor  large  fortune;  and  the  lady's  father  too  having  just  been  made  a  Peer. 
The  wooing  beginning  in  town,  migrates  to  Marlow. 

See,  he  from  Marloiv  sends 
His  eyes  to  Seymours.  p.  41. 

The  lovers  meeting  '  under  the  kind  shade  of  this  tree'  is  noticed.  In  sum, 
the  details  of  a  pure  courtship  leading  up  to  a  happy  marriage. 

In  "  Wits  Recreations,  Selected   [by  the   bookseller  Humphry  Blunden] 
from  the  Finest  Fancies  of  Moderne  Muses.  London,  1640  :"  is  the  following. 
19.    To  Air  William  Habingtoji  on  his  Castara,  a  Poetn. 
Thy  Muse  is  chaste  and  thy  Castara  too, 
'Tis  strange  at  Court,  and  thou  hadst  power  to  woo 
And  to  obtain  (what  others  were  deny'd) 
The  fair  Castara  for  thy  vertuous  bride  : 

Enjoy  what  you  dare  wish,  and  may  there  be, 
Fair  issues  branch  from  both,  to  honor  thee. 
Again,  the  after  incidents  of  life  are  alluded   to,  in  the  poems;  Castara 
has  a  fever  but  she  recovers,  she  mourns  over  the  loss  of  friends,  and  the 
like  :  while,  the  brightness  and  fancifulness  of  this  earlier  poesy  but  reflect 
the  happiness  of  the  Poet's  home. 

7.  There  are  also  songs  of  Friendship.  As  where  he  reproaches  his  bosom 
friend  Talbot  for  not  having  seen  him  for  three  days,  at  p.  39,  or  where  he 
consoles  him  for  the  hard  usage  he  has  received  from  that  jilt  Astrodora,  at 
/.  82  :  and  most  of  all,  in  the  eight  passionate  Elegies  over  his  decease. 

8.  Occasionally  there  is  a  bit  of  lashing  satire,  as  that  against  the  cravings 
of  Poets,  at/.  50  :  or  of  dry  humour,  as  in 

Come  therefore  blest  even  in  the  Lollards  zeale 
Who  canst  with  conscience  safe,  'fore  hen  and  veale 
Say  grace  in  Latine,  while  I  faintly  sing 
A  Penitentiall  verse  in  oyle  and  Ling.  /.  64. 

9.  Lastly  :  strangely  intermingled  are  Requiems  over  the  mortality  of  Man, 
the  vanity  and  uncertainty  of  all  things  ;  leading  almost  to  a  disgust  with  life. 
Of  this  he  thus  give^  the  key-note  in  saying  at/.  114,  'When  the  necessities 
of  nature  returne  him  downe  to  earth,  he  esteemes  it  a  place  he  is  con- 
demned to.  .  .  .  To  live  he  knows  a  benefit,  and  the  contempt  of 
it   ingratitude,  and  therefore  loves,   but  not  doates  on  life.'    To  this  frame 


B  I  li  LIO  G  R  A  ril  Y.  5 

of  thought  may  be  opposed  the  keen  wise  saying  of  a  great  contemporary: 
Selden. 

"  Whilst  you  are  upon  Earth  enjoy  the  good  things  that  are  here  (to  that 
end  were  they  given  and  be  not  mclancIioUy.  and  wish  yourself  in  Heaven. 
If  a  King  should  give  you  the  keeping  of  a  Castle,  with  all  things  belonging 
to  it,  Orchards,  Gardens,  (^c,  and  bid  you  use  them;  withal  promise  you 
that  after  twenty  years  to  remove  you  to  Court,  and  to  make  you  a  Privy 
Councellor.  If  you  should  neglect  your  Castle,  and  refuse  to  eat  of  those 
fruits,  and  sit  down,  and  whine,  and  wish  you  were  a  Privy  Councellor,  do  you 
think  the  King  would  be  pleased  with  youV" — Table  Talk,  p.  84.     Ed.  1867. 

Our  wisdom  is  to  recognise  the  representations  of  Habington,  and  to  live 
in  the  spirit  of  Selden  :  thus  '  using  the  world  as  not  abusing  it.' 


William  Habington's  works  were  published  in  the  following  order  : — 

1634.  Castnra.     First  edition  in  4to. 

1635.  Castara.     Second  edition  in  i2mo. 
16^9-40.     Castara.     Third  edition  in  i2mo. 

1640.  "  The  Historie  of  Edward  the  Fourth,  King  of  England.     By  Wm. 

Habington  Esquire.  London.  Fol."  '  Written  and  published 
as  the  desire  of  K.  Charles  I.':  in  which  his  father  also  'had  a 
considerable  hand.' 

1640.  "  The  Qiteene  0/  Arragon.  A  Tragi-Comedie.  London.  1640." 
'Which  play  he  communicating  to  Philip  earl  of  Pembroke,  lord 
chamberlain  of  the  houshold  to  K.  Charles  I.  he  caused  it  to  be 
acted  at  court,  and  afterwards  to  be  published  against  the  author's 
will.'  lypod :  uievt.  It  was  revived  at  the  Restoration:  with  a 
Prologue  and  Epilogue  by  S.  Butler.  Rejjiains,  i.  185.  Ed. 
by  Thyer,  1759.  It  is  reprinted  in  Dodsley's  Old  Flays,  ix.  333. 
Ed.  1825. 

164X.  Obser'c'ations  vpon  Historie.  London.  These  historical  notes  are 
six  in  number,  upon  as  many  points  in  modern  History:  as  the 
death  of  Richard  I  ;  the  battle  of  Varma,  1444 »  'he  fall  of  Con- 
stantinople; the  abdication  of  Charles  V.  ;  &c. 


B  IB  LI  O  G  R  AP  H  Y. 

With  First  Li.nes,  &c.  of  the  three  first  editions,  showing  the  growth  of  the 

work. 


(a)  EssiifS  in  tije  author's  lifetime 
L  As  a  separate  publication. 
1.    "  C  A  S  T  A  R  A,  &c.     LONDON,  Printed  hy  Atme  Griffin  for  William 
Cooke,  and  are  to  bee  sold  at  his  shop  neare  Furnivals  Inne  gate  in 
Holburne.     1634.     4to." 

Perfectly  anonymous :  all  names  being  represented  by  initials.  It  con- 
sists of  only  two  Parts,  each  having  a  separate  title  page;  in  which  Parts 
are  contained  the  following: 

CASTARA.    The  First  Part.  page 

i.  The  Authour.     [A  Prose  Preface]                   .                .                .  11 

ii.  G[eorge]  T[albot].     Not  in  the  silence  of  content,  and  store  14 
iii.  Fifty-three  Poems,  by  William  Habington. 

1.  Let  the  chaste  Phoenix  from  the  flowry  East,                .                 .  17 

2.  I  saw  Castara  pray,  and  from  the  skie,         .                 .                 .  17 

3.  Yce  blushing  Virgins  happie  are     ....  18 

4.  By  those  chaste  lamps  which  yeeld  a  silent  light          .                .  18 

5.  Where  am  I  ?  not  in  heaven  :  for  oh  I  fccle                   .                 .  19 

6.  Not  still  ith'  shine  of  Kings.     Thou  dost  retire            .                .  19 

7.  Doe  not  their  prophane  (Jrgics  heare,            .                 .                 ,  ao 

8.  .Sing  forth  sweete  Cherubin   for  we  have  choice           .                .  2x 
Q.    In  vaine  faire  sorceresse,  thy  eyes  speake  charmes,     .                 .  2a 

10.   While  you  dare  trust  the  loudest  tongue  of  fame,         .                 .  ra 


BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


54- 
55- 
56. 
57- 
58. 
59- 
60. 
6r. 
62. 

63- 
64. 
65. 
66. 
67. 
68. 
69. 
70. 
71- 


Why  doth  the  stubborne  iron  prove 

Transfix  me  with  that  flaming  dart  _ 

Wing'd  with  dehght  (yet  such  as  still  doth  beare 

Learned  shade  of  Tycho  Brache,  who  to  us, 

Ye  glorious  wits,  who  finde  then  Parian  stone 

If  she  should  dye,  (as  well  suspect  we  may, 

You  younger  children  of  your  father  stay,    . 

Fond  Love  himselfe  hopes  to  disguise 

JTfare.  Checke  thy  forward  thoughts,  and  know 

Nimble  boy  in  thy  warme  flight,    . 

Cupids  dead,  who  would  not  dye. 

Fly  on  thy  swiftest  wing,  ambitious  Fame, 

SrapljtU.  Dost  not  thou  Castara  read 

Why  haste  you  hence  Castara  ?     Can  the  earth, 

I  am  engag'd  to  sorrow,  and  my  heart 

Th'  Arabian  wind,  whose  breathing  gently  blows 

Looke  backe  Castara.     From  thy  eye 

Tis  madnesse  to  give  physicke  to  the  dead  ; 

The  lesser  people  of  the  ayre  conspire 

Swift  in  thy  watry  chariot,  courteous  Thames, 

My  Muse  (great  Lord)  when  last  you  heard  her  sing 

Thankes  Cupid,  but  the  Coach  of  Vemis  moves 

How  fancie  mockes  me  ?     By  th'  effect  I  prove, 

Faire  Mistresse  of  the  earth,  with  garlands  crown'd, 

With  your  calme  precepts  gee,  and  lay  a  storme, 

T'is  I  Castara,  who  when  thou  wert  gone,  . 

Pronounce  me  guilty  of  a  Blacker  crime. 

Thrice  hath  the  pale-fac'd  Empresse  of  the  night, 

Scorn'd  in  thy  watry  Vrne  Narciss7ts  lye,_  . 

Banisht  from  you,  I  charg'd  the  nimble  winde. 

Blest  Temple,  haile,  where  the  Chast  Altar  stands, 

Bright  Dew  which  dost  the  field  adorne 

Stay  under  the  kinde  shadow  of  this  tree 

Dare  not  too  farre  Castara,  for  the  shade    . 

Vowes  are  vaine.     No  suppliant  breath 

Nigi)t.  Let  silence  close  my  troubled  eyes. 

Your  judgement's  cleere,  not  wrinckled  with  the  Time 

What  should  we  feare  Castara^    The  coole  aire, 

More  welcome  my  Castara,  then  was  light 

Why  dost  thou  looke  so  pale,  decrepit  man  ? 

T'was  Night :  when  Pkcebe  guided  by  thy  rayes. 

Why  would  you  blush  Castara,  when  the  naniej 

Like  the  Violet  which  alone 

CASTARA.    The  Second  Part. 

Thirty-six  more  Poems. 
This  day  is  ours.     The  marriage  Angell  now 
Did  you  not  see,  Castara,  when  the  King. 
Whose  whispers  soft  as  those  which  lovers  breath 
Forsake  me  not  so  soone.     Castara  stay,     . 
Hence  prophane  grim  man,  nor  dare  , 

Sleepe  my  Castara,  silence  doth  invite 
She  is  restor'd  to  life.     Vnthrifty  Death,       . 
May  you  drinke  beare,  or  that  adult'rate  wine 
Castara  whisper  in  some  dead  mans  eare,    . 
Forsake  with  me  the  earth,  my  faire, 
Castara  weepe  not,  though  her  tombe  appeare 
What's  death  more  than  departure ;  the  dead  go 
Castara  !  O  you  are  too  prodigall  , 

I  heard  a  sigh,  and  something  in  my  eare     . 
You  saw  our  loves,  and  prais'd  the  mutuall  flame 
Why  should  we  build,  Castara,  in  the  aire 
Castara,  see  that  dust,  the  sportive  wind     , 
Wv;re  but  that  sigh  a  penitentiall  breath 


BIBLIOGRAPHY.  7 

PAGE 

72.  flrapflill.  Castara  you  too  fondly  court        ...  71 

73.  My  thoughts  are  not  so  rugged,  nor  doth  earth           .                .  72 

74.  Tyrant  o're  tyrants,  thou  who  onely  dost      .                .                .  73 

75.  The  breath  of  time  shall  blast  the  flowry  Spring,         .                .  73 

76.  The  reverend  man  by  majjicke  of  his  prayer                .                .  74 

77.  Thy  vowes  are  heard,  and  thy  Castara's  name           .                .  75 

78.  Thou  dre.ime  of  madmen,  ever  changing  gale,             .                .  75 

79.  Were  we  by  fate  throwne  downe  below  our  feare        .                .  76 

80.  What  can  the  freedome  of  our  love  enthrall?                .                 .  76 

81.  Bright  Saint,  thy  pardon,  if  my  sadder  verse                 .                 .  77 

82.  I  like  the  greene  plush  which  your  meadows  weare     .                .  78 

83.  Thou  art  return'd  (great  Light)  to  that  blest  houre      .                 .  80 

84.  They  meet  but  with  unwholesome  Springs    ...  80 

85.  The  Laurell  doth  your  reverend  temples  wreath          .                .  81 

86.  'Bout  th'  husband  Oke,  the  Vine    ....  82 

87.  Let  not  thy  grones  force  Eccho  from  her  cave,            .                .  82 

88.  We  saw  and  woo'd  each  others  eyes              ...  83 

89.  Here  Virgin  fix  thy  pillars,  and  command    .                                 .  q8 

2.    "CASTARA,^c.   The  Second  Edition.   Corrected  and  Augmented. 

London.    Printed  by  B.  A.  and  T.  F.  for  Will.  Cooke,  and  are  to  bee 

sold  at  his  shop  neare  Fitrnivals-Inne  Gate  in  Holbjirne,  1635.   i2mo." 

In  this  second  edition,  the  authorship  is  avowed  by  means  of  a  new  heading 

to  G.  Talbot's  poem,  at/.  14.     It  still  consists  of  but  two  Parts,  each  with  a 

separate  title:  but  is  augmented  by  three  Characters  in  prose  and  twenty-six 

poems;  all  by  Habington. 

CASTARA.    The  First  Part. 


IS 


u. 
90. 
91. 
92. 


A  Character.     A  Mistris. 

Four  additional  poems  are  inserted. 

Hee  who  is  good  is  happy.     Let  the  loude 

Harke,  how  the  traytor  winde  doth  court  . 

It  shall  not  grieve  me  (friend)  though  what  I  write    . 

93.  You  who  are  earth,  and  cannot  rise 

CASTARA.    The  Second  Part, 
iii.  A  Character.     A  Wife. 
iv.  Fourteen  additional  Poems. 

94.  Though  my  deare  Talbots  Fate  exact,  a  sad 

95.  If  your  example  be  obey'd 

96.  Its  false  Arithmaticke  to  say  thy  breath 

97.  Why  should  we  feare  to  melt  away  in  death 

98.  ^Vhen  PelioK  wondring  saw,  that  raine  which  fell     . 

99.  O  whither  dost  thou  flye  ?     Cannot  my  vow 
100.  Where  sleepes  the  North-wind  when  the  South  inspires 
loi.  Should  the  cold  Muscovit,  whose  furre  aud  stove 

102.  Atnphion,  O  thou  holy  shade 

103.  You'd  leave  the  silence  in  which  safe  we  are 

104.  Give  me  a  heart  where  no  impure 

105.  Why  doth  the  eare  so  tempt  the  voyce, 

106.  I  hate  the  Countries  durt  and  manners,  yet 

107.  I  wonder  when  w'are  dca  1,  what  men  will  say; 
V.  A  Character.     A  Frie>id. 

vi.  Eight  Elegies  "  The  Ftaierals  of  the  Honourable,  vty  best 
Friend  and  Kinsman,  George  Talbot,  Esq." 
(1}  Twere  malice  to  the  fame ;  to  weepe  alone 

12)  Talbot  is  dead.  Like  lightning  which  no  part  . 
3)  Let  me  contemplate  thee  (faire  soule)  and  though 
4)  My  name,  dear  friend,  even  thy  expiring  breath 

(5)  Chast  as  the  Nuns  first  vow,  as  fairely  bright 

(6)  Goe  stop  the  swift-wing'd  moments  in  their  flight 

(7)  There  is  no  peace  in  sinne.     iEternall  war 
115.  (8)  Boast  not  the  rev'rcnd  Vatican,  nor  all 

8.  1640.  Third  Edition  in  i2mo:  with  Titles, 'Characters,  and  Poems  ar- 
ranccd  in  the  order  here  reprinted.  For  titles,  see//,  o,  55,111.  There  are  no 
further  additions  to  the  first  two  parts :  but  there  is  added  an  entire  Third  Part. 


108. 
109. 
no. 
III. 
112. 

"3- 
114 


57 

84 
86 
88 
89 
89 
90 
90 

91 
92 
92 
94 
95 
96 

97 


TOI 
lOI 
102 
103 
104 
105 
107 
108 
109 


8  BIBLIOGRAPHY. 

CASTARA.    Third  Part. 

i.  A  Character.     T/ie  Holy  Man.  .  .  ,  112 

ii.  Twenty-two  Poems,  chiefly  Sacred,  with  mottoes  from  the  Vulgate. 

We  have  here  given  the  equivalent  passages  in  the  Authorized  version: 

inserting  between  [  ]  the  Douay  version  !  where  it  more  closely  follows 

the  Latin  of  the  Vulgate. 

116.  O  Lord,  open  tho7ivty  lips.  Vs.X\.\^.     No  monument  of  me  remainc      115 

117.  My  harp  also  is  turned  to  vioiirning.  Job  xxx.  31.     Love  !   I 

no  orgies  sing  .  .  .  .  ,116 

118.  I  will  destroy  the  ivisdo7n  of  the  wise,   i  Cor.  i.  19.     Forgive 

my  envie  to  the  World ;  while  I  .  .  .  118 

119.  [Declare  tinto  me  the  feivnes  of7ny  days,  Douay].     He  short- 

ened 7)iy  days.  Ps.  cii.  23.     Tell  me  O  great  All  knowing  God  119 

120.  Not  niito  7is,  O  Lord.   Ps.  cxv.  i.     No  marble  statue,  nor  high  120 

121.  The  graves  are  ready  for  tne.    Job  xvii.  i.     Welcome  thou 

safe  retreate  !.....  121 

122.  He  feeth  also  as  a  shadow.   Job  xiv.  2.     What  shadow  your 

faire  body  made         .  ...  122 

123.  Night  tinto  night  sheweth  knowledge.    Ps.  xix.  2.     When  I 

survay  the  bright       .  .  •  ...     •  •  ^^4 

124.  Biit  the  pro7id  he  knoweth  afar  off.   Ps.  cxxxviii.  6.     To  the 

cold  humble  hermitage  ....  125 

125.  Thon  wilt  make  all  his  bed  in  his  sickness.  Ps.  xli.  3.     My 

Soule  !    When  thou  and  I        .  .  .  .  126 

126.  Praise  ye  the  Lord  fro 7n  the  heavefts.    Ps.  cxlviii.  i.     You 

Spirits !  who  have  throwne  away  .  .  .  127 

127.  He  Cometh  forth  like  a  flower.  Job  xiv.  2.     Faire  Madame :  you         129 

128.  Why  boasteth  tho7i  thyself  in  mischief.    Ps.  lii.  i.     Swell  no 

more,  proud  man,  so  high !      .  .  .  .  130 

129.  My  God,  my  God.  Ps.  xxii.  i.     There  is  that  foole  Philosophic  131 

130.  \For  I  am  ready  for  scourges,  Douay],     For  I  am  ready  to 

halt.  Ps.  xxxviii.  17.     Fix  me  on  some  bleake  precipice     .  133 

131.  \The  life  of  tnan  upon  earth  is  a  warfare,  Douay].     Is  there 

not  an  appointed  ti>ne  to  man  tipon  earth.    Job  vii.  i. 

Were  it  your  appetite  of  glory,  (which  .  .  134 

132.  Shew  me  thy  ways,   O  Lord.    Ps.   xxv.   4.     Where  have  I 

wandred?     In  what  way  ....  136 

133.  And  exalteth  them  of  low  degree.    Luke  i.  52.     How  cheere- 

fully  th'  unpartiall  Sunne         .  .  .  .138 

134.  Lord  of  Lords.  Deut.  x.  17.     Supreame  Divinity  !     Who  yet  139 

135.  /  will  be  sorry  for  my  sin.    Ps.  xxxviii.  18.     In  what  darke 

silent  grove  .....  140 

136.  I  shall  go  softly  all  my  years.   Is.  xxxviii.  15.     Time!  where 

didst  thou  those  years  inter     ....  142 

137.  Having  a  desire  to  depart.  Phil.  i.  23.     The  soule  which  doth 

with  God  unite  .....  143 

II.    With  other  Works. 
None, 
(b)  Ussucs  since  tlje  ^tttl)or'0  lieatf). 
I.  As  a  separate piiblicatiojt. 
6.  14  April  1870.  London,     i  vol.  8vo.     English  Reprints:  see  title  at/,  i. 
This  Edition  follows  No.  3  as  to  the  arrangement  of  the  Poems, 
&c. :  but  has  been  corrected  with  the  earlier  editions;  when  ever 
in  spelling  or  punctuation  the  former  were  the  better  readings. 
In  doubtful  cases,  the  earlier  variations  are  shown  in  footnotes. 
5.  [1812.]  Bristol.     "  Habington's  Castara,  with  a   preface   and  notes   by 
ivol.  Svo.       Charles  A.  Elton  "    [A  reprint  of  No.  3.] 

II.    With  other  Works. 
4.  London.  1810.   The  Works  of  the  English  Poets.     Ed.  by  A.  Chalmers, 
21  vols.  Svo.    F.S.A.     Vol.  iv.  437-482  contains  a  Reprint  of  No.  3. 
III.  Selections,  &^c. 
One  or  more  of  these  Poems  will  be  found  in  the  Selections  of  Ellis,  H. 
Ileadley,  'The  Lyre  of  Love,  E.  Sandford's  British  Poets,  &c.  &c. 


CASTARA : 


— Carniina  non  prms 
Audita,  Mtcfarwn  facer- 
dos    Vzrgi7ub2is, — 

The  third  Edition. 
Correfted  and  augmented 


L 0  N  DO  N 

Printed  by  T,  Cotes,  for  Will. 

Cooke:  and  are  to  be  fold  at  his 

Shop  neere  Fentivals-Imie  Gate 
in  Holbiinie.     1640. 


The  Author 


He  rrefle  hath  gathered  into  one,  what 
ilmcie  had  fcattered  in  many  loofe 
papers.  To  write  this,  love  Hole  fome 
houres  from  bufmefle,  and  my  more 
fcrious  Rudy.  For  though  Poetry  may 
challenge  if  not  priority,  yet  equality 
with  the  befl  Sciences,  both  for  anti- 
quity and  worth ;  I  never  fet  fo  liigh  a  rate  upon  it,  as  to 
give  my  felfe  entirely  up  to  its  devotion.  It  hath  too  much 
ayre,  and  (if  without  offence  to  our  next  tranfmarine 
neighbour,)  ^vantons  too  much  according  to  the  French 
garbe.  And  when  it  is  wholly  imployed  in  thefoft  flraines 
of  love,  his  foule  who  entertaines  it,  lofeth  much  of  that 
flrength  which  fhould  confirme  him  man.  The  nerves 
of  judgement  are  weakned  mofl  by  its  dalliance,  and 
when  woman,  (I  meane  onlye  as  flie  is  externally  faire) 
is  the  fupreme  obje6t  of  wit,  we  foone  degenerate  into 
effeminacy.  For  the  religion  of  fancie  declines  into  a 
nuid  fuperflition,  when  it^  adores  that  Idoll  which  is 
not  fecure  from  age  and  fickneffe.  Of  fuch  heathens, 
our  times  afford  us  a  pittyed  multitude,  who  can  give 
no  nobler  teflimony  of  twenty  yeares  imployment,  then 
fome  loofe  coppies  of  lufl  happily  exprefl.  Yet  thefe 
the  common  people  of  ^vit  blow  up  with  their  breath 
of  praife,  and  honour  with  the  Sacred  name  of  Poets: 
To  which  as  I  beleeve  they  can  never  have  any  jufl 
rlaime,  fo  fhall  I  not  dare  by  this  effay  to  lay  any  title, 
fince  more  fweate  and  oyle  he  mud  fpend,  who  fliall 
arrogate  fo  excellent  an  attribute.  Yet  if  the  inno- 
cency  of  a  chafle  Mufe  fhall  bee  more  acceptable,  and 
weigh  heavier  in  the  ballance  of  efleeme,  than  a  fame, 
begot  in  adultery  of  fludy  ;  I  doubt  I  (hall  leave  them 
no  hope  of  competition.  For  how  unhappie  foever  I 
may  be  in  the  elocution,  I  am  fure  the  Theame  is 


I  :  he  wantons  too  much.     1635. 


2  she  adores.     1635. 


12 


worthy  enough.     In  all  thofe  flames  in  which  I  burnt, 
I  never  felt  a  wanton  heate,  nor  was  my  invention  ever 
fmifler  from  the  flraite  way  of  chaflity.    And  when  love 
builds  upon  that  rocke,  it  may  fafely  contemne  the 
battery  of  the  waves,   and  threatnings  of  the  wind. 
Since   time,    that   makes   a   mockery   of  the   firmefL 
flruclures  fhall  it  felfe  be  ruinated,  before  that  be  de- 
molilht.     Thus  was  the  foundation  layd.     And  though 
my  eye  in  its  furvey,  was  fatisfi'd,  even  to  curiofity,  yet 
did  not  my  fearch  reft  there.     The  Alabafler,  Ivory, 
Porphir,  let,  that  lent  an  admirable  beauty  to  the  out- 
ward building,  entertained  me  with  but  a  halfe  plea- 
fure,  fmce  they  flood  there  onely  to  make  fport  for 
ruine.     But  when  my  foule  grew  acquainted  with  the 
owner  of  that  manfion;  I  found  that  Oratory  was  dombe 
when  it  began  to  fpeak  her,  and  wonder  (which  mufl 
neceffarily  feize  the  befl  at  that  time)  a  lethargic,  that 
dulled  too  much  the  faculties  of  the  minde,  onely  fit 
to  bufie   themfelves   in    difcourfing   her   perfe6lions, 
Wifdome,  I  encounter'd  there,  that  could  not  fpend  it 
felfe  fmce  it  afife6led  filence,  attentive  onely  to  in- 
flrudlions,  as  if  all  her  fences  had  beene  contra6ted 
into  hearing  :  Innocencie,  fo  not  vitiated  by  converfa- 
tion  with  the  world,  that  the  fubtile  witted  of  her  fex, 
would  have  tearm'd  it  ignorance  :  Wit,  which  feated 
it  felfe  mofl  in  the  apprehenfion,  and  if  not  inforc't  by 
good  manners,  would  fcarce  have  gain'd  the  name  of 
affability :  Modedy,  fo  timorous,  that  it  reprefented  a 
befieg'd  Citty,   flan  ding   watchfully  upon  her  guard, 
flrongefl  in  the  loyalty  to  her  Prince.     In  a  word,  all 
thofe  vertues  which  fliould  reflore  woman  to  her  primi- 
tive flate  of  beauty,  fully  adorn'd  her.     But  I  fliall  be 
cenfur'd,  in  labouring  to  come  nigh  the  truth,  guilty 
of  an  indifcreet  Rhetoricke.     However  fuch  I  fancied 
her,  for  to  fay  fhee  is,  or  was  fuch,  were  to  play  the 


13 

Merchant,  and  boafl  too  much  the  vahie  of  a  lewell  I 
poflelTc,  but  have  no  minde  to  part  with.  And  though 
I  appeare  to  flrive  againR  the  flreame  of  befl  wits,  in 
ere(51.ing  the  felfe  fame  Altar,  both  to  chaflity  and  love; 
I  will  for  once  adventure  to  doe  well,  without  a  prefi- 
dent.  Nor  if  my  rigid  friend  queflion  fuperciliouOy 
the  fetting  forth  of  thefe  Poems,  will  I  excufe  my  felfe 
(though  juflly  perhaps  I  might)  that  importunity  pre- 
vail'd,  and  cleere  judgements  advis'd.  This  onely  I 
dare  fay,  that  if  they  are  not  flrangled  with  en  vie  of 
the  prefent,  they  may  happily  live  in  the  not  diflike  of 
future  times.  For  then  partiality  ceafeth,  and  vertue 
is  without  the  idolatry  of  her  clients,  efleemed  worthy 
honour.  Nothing  new  is  free  from  detracflion,  and 
when  Princes  alter  cuflomes  even  heavie  to  the 
fubjecl,  befl  ordinances  are  interpreted  innovations. 
Had  I  flept  in  the  filence  of  my  acquaintance,  and 
affe6led  no  fludy  beyond  that  which  the  chafe  or  field 
allowes,  Poetry  had  then  beene  no  fcandall  upon  me, 
and  the  love  of  learning  no  fufpition  of  ill  husbandry. 
But  what  malice,  begot  in  the  Country  upon  ignorance, 
or  in  the  City  upon  Criticifme,  fhall  prepare  againft 
me,  I  an  armed  to  endure.  For  as  the  face  of  vertue 
lookes  faire  without  the  adultery  of  Art,  fo  fame  needes 
no  ayde  from  rumour  to  flrengthen  her  felfe.  If  thefe 
lines  want  that  courtfliip,  (I  will  not  fay  flattery)  which 
infinuates  it  felfe  into  the  favour  of  great  men,  befl ; 
they  partake  of  my  modelly.  If  Satyre  to  win  applaufe 
with  the  envious  multitude ;  they  exprefle  my  content, 
which  maliceth  none,  the  fruition  of  that,  they  efleeme 
happie.  And  if  not  too  indulgent  to  what  is  my  owne  ; 
I  thinke  even  thefe  verfes  will  have  that  proportion  m 
the  worlds  ojjinion,  that  heaven  hath  allotted  me  in 
fortune  ;  not  fo  high,  as  to  be  wondred  at,  nor  fo  low 
as  to  be  contemned. 


^To  his  beft  friend   and    Kinfman 
William  Habington,  Efqulre. 

^J  Ot  in  thefile7ice  of  conteiit  andjlore 
^  Of  private  fweets  ought  thy  Miife  charmeno  more 
Then  thy  CaflaraV  eare.     '  Twere  wrong  fuch  gold 
Should  not  like  Mines ^  (poore  nairid  to  this)  behold 
It  felfe  a  piihlike  joy.      Who  her  rejlraifie^ 
Make  a  clofe  prifoner  of  a  Soveraigne. 
Inlarge  her  then  to  triumph.      While  we  fee 
Such  worth  in  beauty.,  fuch  defej^t  in  thee., 
Such  mutuall flames  betweene  you  both,  asfhow 
How  chaflity,  though  yce,  like  love  can  glow. 
Yet  fland  a  Virgin:  How  that  fidl  content 
By  vertue  is  to  foules  tmited,  lent, 
Which  proves  all  wealth  is  poore,  all  honours  are 
But  empty  titles,  highefl  power  but  cai'e, 
That  quits  not  cofl.      Yet  Heaveji  to  Vertue  kind. 
Hath  given  you  plenty  to  suffice  a  minde 
That  knowes  but  temper.    For  beyond  your  flate 
May  be  a  prouder,  not  a  happier  Fate. 
I  Write  not  this  in  hope  finci'oach  on  fame. 
Or  adde  a  greater  luflre  to  your  name. 
Bright  in  it  felfe  enough.      We  two  ai^e  knowne 
To  tic  World,  as  to  our  felves,  to  be  but  one 
In  blood  as  fludy  :  And  my  careful  I  love 
Did  never  action  wo7'th  my  name,  approve 
Which  ferv'd  not  thee.     Nor  did  we  ere  contend, 
Bid  whofliould  be  befl  patterne  of  a  friend. 
Who  read  thee,  praife  thy  fancie,  and  admire 
Thee  burning  with  fo  high  and  pure  afire, 
As  reaches  heaven  it  felfe.     But  I  who  hunv 
Thy  foule  religious  to  her  ends,  where  groiv 
No  flnnes  by  art  or  cufiome,  boldly  can 
Stile  thee  more  than  good  Poet,  a  good  man. 
Then  let  thy  temples  fliake  off  vulgar  bayes, 
T/i'  haft  built  an  Altar  which  enfJirincs  thy  praife  : 
And  to  the  faith  of  after  time  commends 
Yee  the  beft  pair e  of  lovers,  ns  of  friends. 

^George  Talbot. 

1  To  his  best frieftd  and  ki}iS7fi(m,  On  his  Cast A'Rh.    1634.      2  G.  T.   16^4. 


A  Mistris. 


S  the  fairejl  trcafnre^   the  avarice  of 
Love  can  covet ;  and  the  onely  white, 
at  which  he  JJiootes  his  arroives,  nor 
7vhile  his  aitne  is  noble,  can  he  ever 
hit  upo?i  repentance.     She  is  chajle, 
for  the  dcvill  enters  the  Idoll  and 
gives  the  Oracle,  when  wajitonneffe 
poffeffeth  beauty,  and  wit  ?naif2tai?ies  it  lawfull.     She  is 
as  f aire  as  Nature  i7it ended  her,  helpt  perhaps  to  a  more 
pleafing  grace  by  the  fweetneffe  of  education,  not  by  the 
flight  of  Art.     She  is  yoimg,  for  a  ivoman  paft  the  deli- 
cacie  of  her  fpri?ig,  may  well  move  by  vertue  to  refpe^, 
never  by  beauty  to  affection .     Shee  is  ifiiiocent  even  from 
the  knowledge  offuine,  for  vice  is  too  stro?ig  to  be  wraflled 
with,  and  gives  her  frailty  the  foyle.     She  is  not  proude, 
though  the  a7?iorous  youth  inte7pret  her  modeflie  to  that 
fence ;  but  in  her  vertue  wcares  fo  much  Majeflie,  lufl 
dares  not  rebel  I,  nor  though  mafqued,  under  the  pretence 
of  love,  capitulate  with  her.     She  eritertaifies  7tot  every 
parley  offer' d,  although  the  Articles  pretended  to  her  ad- 
vantage :  advice  and  her  own  feares  reflraine  her,  and 
woman  na'cr  owed  rui7U  to  too  i7iuch  caution.      She 
glories  7iot  i7i  the  plurality  of  ferva7its,  a  midtitude  of 
adorers  heaven  ca7i  onely  challe7ige,  and  it  is  i77ipietie  in 
her  weake7ieffe  to  defire  fuperflitio7i  from  7na7iy.     She  is 
deafe  to  the  whispers  of  love,  a7id  eve7i  07i  the  marriage 
houre  can  breake  off,  without  the  leafl  fufpition  of  fca7i- 
dall,  to  the  for77ier  liberty  of  her  carriage.     She  avoydes 
a  too  neere  co7iverfatio7i  with  man,  and  like  the  Parthian 
07'ercomes  by  flight.     Her  language  is  not  copious  but 
(^Ppofit,  a7id  fJie  had  rather  fuffer  the  reproach  of  bei7ig 
dull  C077ipa7iy,  tha7i  have  the  title  of  Witty,  with  that  of 


i6 

Bold  a?td  Wanto7i.     In  her  carriage  fJie  is  fober,  and 

t /mikes  her  youth  exprejfeth  life  enough^  without  the  giddy 

motion^  faJJiion  of  late  hath  taken  up.     She  danceth  to 

the  hefl  applaufe  but  doates  not  on  the  vanity  of  it,  nor 

licenceth  a?t  irregular  meeting  to  vau7tt  the  levity  of  her 

skill.     She  fngs,  but  7iot  perpetually,  for  JJie  knowes, 

filence  in  woman  is  the  fnofl  perfwading  oratory.     She 

never  arrived  to  fo  much  familiarity  with  man  as  to 

know  the  diminutive  of  his  name,  and  call  him  by  it ; 

and  Jlie  can  JJiozv  a  competent  favour :  without  yeelding 

her  hand  to  his  gi^ipe.     Shee  never  ujiderflood  the  la?i- 

guage  of  a  kiffe,  but  at  falutation,  nor  dares  the  Courtier 

ufefo  much  of  his  praBifed  impudejice  as  to  offer  the  rape 

of  it  from  her :  becaufe  chastity  hath  writ  it  unlawfull, 

and  her  behaviour  proclaimes  it  unwelcome.    She  is  never 

fad,  and  yet  not  jiggifh ;  her  confcie?ice  is  cleere  from 

guilt,  and  that  fecures  her  from  forrow.     She  is  not 

paffionately  in  love  with  poetry,  becaufe  it  foftens  the 

heart  too  much  to  love;  but  Jlie  likes  the  harmony  in  the 

Compofitioji ;  and  the  bj'ave  examples  of  vert  lie  celebrated 

by  it,flie  propofeth  to  her  imitation.     She  is  7iot  vaine 

i7i  the  hift07y  of  her  gay  ki7tdred  or  acquainta7ice ;  fuice 

ve7'tue  is  ofte7i  te7ia7it  to  a  cottage,  a7id  fa77iiliarity  ivith 

great7ieffe  {if  worth  be  7iot  tra7fce7ida7it  above  the  title)  is 

but  a  glo7-ious  fe7^vitude,  foolts  07iely  a7'e  willi7ig  to  fuffer. 

She  is  not  a77ibitious  to  be  praised,  and  yet  valines  death 

beneath  i7ifa77iy.     And  Jle  conclude,   {though  the  next 

fmod  of  Ladies  C07ide7n7ie  this  charaBer  as  a7i  herefce 

broacht  by  a  Precifi07i)  that  onely  fJie  who  hath  as  great 

a  fJiai'c  in  vertue  as  i7i  beauty^  deferves  a  noble  love  to 

ferve  her,  a7id  a  free  Poefte  to  fpeake  her. 


17 

To    C  A  S  T  A  R  A. 

A   Sacrifice, 


iKT  the  chafle  Phoenix  from  the  flo^^Ty  Eafl, 
Bring  the  fweete  treafure  of  her  perfum'd  ned, 
As  incenfe  to  this  Ahar,  where  the  name 
Of  my  Cajlara's  grav'd  by  th'  hand  of  fame. 
Let  purer  \'irgins,  to  rcdeeme  the  aire 
From  loofe  infeclion,  bring  their  zealous  prayer, 
T'  affill  at  this  great  feafl :  where  they  fliall  fee, 
What  rites  Love  offers  up  to  Chaflity. 
Let  all  the  amorous  Youth,  whole  faire  defire 
Felt  never  warmth,  bur  from  a  noble  fire, 
Bring  hither  their  bright  flames  :  which  here  fliall  fliine 
As  Tapers  fixt  about  CaJIara's  flirine. 

While  I  the  Priefl,  my  untam'd  heart,  furprife, 
And  in  tliis  Temple  mak't  her  facrifice. 

To    C  A  S  T  A  R  A, 
Prayijzg. 

[Saw  Casta7'a  pray,  and  from  the  skle, 
A  winged  legion  of  bright  Angels  flie 
Tocatch her vowes,forfeareher  Virgin  prayer 
'Might  chance  to  mingle  with  impurer  aire. 
To  vulgar  eyes,  the  facred  truth  I  write, 
ALay  fecme  a  fancie.     But  the  Eagles  fight 
Of  Saints,  and  Poets,  miracles  oft  view. 
Which  to  dull  Heretikes  appeare  untrue. 
Faire  zeale  begets  fuch  wonders.     O  divine 
And  purefl  beauty ;  let  me  thee  enflirine 
In  my  devoted  foule,  and  from  thy  praife, 
T'  enrich  my  garland,  pluck  religious  Bayes. 

Shine  thou  the  flarre  by  which  my  thoughts  fhall  move, 
Bcfl  fubjecl  of  my  pen,  Queene  of  my  love. 


i8 

To  Rofes  in  the  bofome  ^Castara. 

EE  blufhing  Virgins  happie  are 
In  the  chafle  Nunn'iy  of  her  brefls, 
For  hee'd  prophane  fo  chafle  a  faire, 
'Who  ere  fliould  call  diem  Cupids  nefls. 

Tranfplanted  dius  how  bright  yee  grow, 
How  rich  a  perfume  doe  yee  yeeld  ? 
In  fome  clofe  garden,  Cowflips  fo 
Are  fweeter  then  ith'  open  field.     , 

In  thofe  white  Cloyflers  live  feciire 
From  the  rude  blafls  of  wanton  breath, 
Each  houre  more  innocent  and  pure, 
Till  you  fliall  wither  into  death. 

Then  that  which  living  gave  you  roome, 
Your  glorious  fepulcher  fliall  be. 
There  wants  no  marble  for  a  tombe, 
Whofe  brefl  hath  marble  beene  to  me. 

To    C  A  S  T  A  R  A, 

A  Vow. 

Y  thofe  chafle  lamps  which  yeeld  a  filent  light, 
To  the  cold  Vrnes  of  Virgins ;  By  that  night, 
Which  guilty  of  no  crime,  doth  onely  heare 
The  Vowes  of  reclufe  Nuns,  and  th'  An'thrits 
And  by  thy  chafler  felfe  ;  My  fervent  zeale      [prayer ; 
Like  mountaine  yee,  which  the  North  winds  congeale, 
To  pureft  Chriflall,  feeles  no  wanton  fire. 
But  as  the  humble  Pilgrim,  (whofe  defire 
Blefl  in  Chrifls  cottage,  view  by  Angels  hands, 
Tranfported  from  fad  Bethlem,)  wondring  flands 
At  the  great  miracle  :  So  I  at  thee, 
"Whofe  beauty  is  the  flirine  of  chaflity. 

'Jlius  my  bright  Mufe  in  a  new  orbe  fhall  move, 
And  even  teach  Religion  how  to  love. 


19 

To    C  A  S  T  A  R  A, 

Of  his  being  in  Love, 

^  'Here  am  I  ?  not  in  Heaven  :   for  oh  I  feele 
Y^jj'l  lie  flone  of  SifiJ>/ius,  Ixioiis  whcele  ; 
i^vJjAnd  all  thofe  tortures,  Poets  (by  their  wine 
Made  judges)  laid  on  7  a /it  a/us,  are  mine. 
Not  yet  am  I  in  hell;  for  flill  I  (land, 
Thougli  giddy  in  my  paffion,  on  firme  land, 
And  flill  behold  the  feafons  of  the  yeare, 
Springs  in  my  hope,  and  Winters  in  my  feare. 
And  fure  I'me  'bove  the  earth  :  For  th'  hiohefl  liar 

o 

Shoots  beames,  but  dim  to  what  Casiard's  are, 
And  in  her  fight  and  favour  1  even  fhine 
In  a  bris^ht  orbe  bevond  the  Chriflalline. 
If  then  CnJIiva  I  in  Heaven  nor  move, 
Nor  Earth,  nor  Hell ;  where  am  I  but  in  Love  ? 

To  my  honoiLred  Friend ^  Mr.  E.  P. 
^fJOt  flill  ith'  fliine  of  Kings.    Thou  doft  retire 


>;b^^>lSometime  to  th'  Holy  fliade,  where  the  chafle 
Of  Mufes  doth  the  flubborne  Panther  awe, 


And  give  the  wilderneffe  of  his  nature  law. 
The  wind  his  chariot  flops  :  Th'  attentive  rocke 
The  rigor  doth  of  its  creation  mocke, 
And  gently  melts  away  :  Argus  to  heare 
The  muficke,  turnes  each  eye  into  an  eare. 
To  welcome  thee,  Endyniio?!,  glorious  they 
Triumph  to  force  thefe  creatures  difobey 
What  nature  hath  enacfled.     But  no  charme 
The  Mufes  have  thefe  monflers  can  diflirme 
Of  their  innated  rage  :  No  fpell  can  tame 
The  North-winds  fury,  but  CaJIara's  name. 
Climbe  yonder  forked  hill,  and  fee  if  there 
Ith'  barke  of  every  Daphne,  not  appeare 
CaJJara  written  ;  And  fo  markt  by  me, 
How  great  a  Prophet  growes  each  Virgin  tree  ? 


20 


Lie  downe,  and  liflen  what  the  facred  fpring 
In  her  harmonious  murmures,  Riives  to  fing 
To  th'  neighb'ring  banke,  ere  her  loofe  waters  errc 
Through  common  channels  ;  fmgs  fhe  not  of  her? 
Behold  yond'  violet,  which  fuch  honour  games, 
That  growing  but  to  emulate  her  veines, 
It's  azur'd  like  the  skie :  when  flie  doth  bow 
T'  invoke  Cajlara,  heav'n  perfumes  her  vow. 
The  trees  the  water,  and  the  flowers  adore 
The  Deity  of  her  fex,  and  through  each  pore 
Breath  forth  her  glories.     But  unquiet  love 
^To  make  thy  paffions  fo  uncourtly  prove, 
As  if  all  eares  fliould  heare  her  praife  alone. 
Now  liaen  thou ;  Endymion  fmgs  his  owne. 

To    C  A  S  T  A  R  A. 

Oe  not  their  prophane  Orgies  heare, 

Who  but  to  wealth  no  altars  reare. 

The  foule's  oft  poys'ned  through  the  eare. 

Cajlara  rather  feeke  to  dwell 
Ith'  filence  of  a  private  cell. 
Rich  difcontent's  a  glorious  hell. 

Yet  Hindlip  doth  not  want  extent 
Of  roome  (though  not  magnificent) 
To  give  free  welcome  to  content. 

There  flialt  thou  fee  the  earely  Spring, 
That  wealthy  Rocke  of  nature  bring. 
Of  which  the  Sybils  bookes  did  fing. 

From  fruitleffe  Palmes  lliall  honey  flow, 
And  barren  Winter  HarveR  fliow. 
While  Lilies  in  his  bofome  grow. 

No  North-winde  fliall  the  come  mfeil, 

But  the  foft  fpirit  of  the  Eaft, 

Our  fent  with  perfum'd  banquets  feaR. 

1  To  make  affection  so  ill-nurtur'd  prove.     1634,  163s. 


21 

A  Sat\Te  here  and  there  Hiall  trip, 
In  hope  to  purchafe  leave  to  fip 
Sweete  Nedlar  from  a  Fairies  Hp. 

The  Nimphs  with  quivers  fliall  adome 
Their  acflive  fides,  and  roiife  the  morne 
AVith  the  flnill  muficke  of  their  home. 

Wakened  with  wliich,  and  viewing  thee, 
Faire  Daphne  her  faire  felfe  fliall  free, 
From  the  chafle  prifon  of  a  tree  : 

And  with  Narciffus  (to  thy  face 
Who  humbly  will  afcribe  all  grace) 
Shall  once  againe  purfue  the  chafe. 

So  they,  whofe  wifdome  did  difcuffe 
Of  thefe  as  fidlions  :  fliall  in  us 
Fmde,  they  were  more  then  fabulous. 


To    C  A  S  T  A  R  A, 

Softly  finging  to  her  felfe. 

Ing  forth  fweete  Cherubin  (for  we  have  choice 
Of  reafons  in  thy  beauty  and  the  voyce, 
JjTo  name  thee  fo,  and  fcarce  appeare  prophane) 
"Sing  forth,  that  while  the  orbs  celefliall  Rraine 
To  eccho  thy  fweete  note,  our  humane  eares 
May  then  receive  the  Muficke  of  the  Spheares. 
But  yet  take  heede,  left  if  the  Swans  of  Thames, 
That  adde  harmonious  pleafurc  to  the  flreames, 
0th'  fudden  heare  thy  well-divided  breath, 
Should  liflen,  and  in  filence  welcome  death; 
And  ravifht  Nightingales,  flriving  too  high 
To  reach  thee,  in  the  emulation  dye. 

And  thus  there  will  be  left  no  bird  to  fmg 
Farewell  to  th'  Waters,  welcome  to  the  Spring. 


22 


To  a  Wanton. 

JN  vaine  faireforcereffe,  thy  eyes  fpeake  charmes, 
In  vaine  thou  mak'ftloofe  circles  with  thyarmes. 
Il'me  'bove  thy  fpels.  No  magicke  him  can  move, 
In  whom  CaJIara  hath  infpir'd  lier  love. 
As  (lie,  keepe  thou  flricSi.  cent'nell  o're  thy  eare, 
Left  it  the  whifpers  of  foft  Courtiers  heare  ; 
Reade  not  his  raptures,  whole  invention  mufl 
Write  journey  worke,  both  for  his  Patrons  lull, 
And  his  owne  plufli :  let  no  admirer  feafl 
His  eye  oth'  naked  banquet  of  thy  bred. 
If  this  faire  prefident,  nor  yet  my  want 
Of  love,  to  anfwer  thine,  make  thee  recant 
Thy  forc'ries ;  Pity  fliall  to  juflice  turne, 
And  judge  thee,  witch,  in  thy  owne  flames  to  burne. 


To  the  Honourable  my  much  hoitoured 
friend,  R.  B.  Ef quire. 


^pSfHile  you  dare  trufl  the  lou  deft  tongue  of  fame, 
ll?«Vpi  The  zeale  you  heare  your  Miilreffe  to  proclaim 


'    Fo  th' talking  world:  I  in  the  fdent'fl  grove, 
Scarce  to  my  felfe  dare  whifper  that  I  love. 
Thee,  titles  Brud'nell^  riches  thee  adorne. 
And  vigorous  youth  to  vice  not  headlong  borne 
By  th'  tide  of  cuflome:  Which  I  value  more 
Then  what  blind  fuperflitious  fooles  adore, 
Who  greatneffe  in  the  chaire  of  bliffe  enthrone. 
Greatneffe  we  borrow,  Vertue  is  our  owne. 
In  thy  attempt  be  profperous,  and  when  ere 
Thou  fhalt  prefix  the  houre ;  may  Hymen  weare 
His  brightefl  robe  ;  where  fome  fam'd  Perfian  fhall 
Worke  by  the  wonder  of  her  needle  all 
The  nuptiall  joyes;  which  (if  we  Poets  be 


23 

Tnie  Prophets)  bounteous  heaven  defignes  for  thee. 

I  envie  not,  but  glory  in  thy  flite, 

While  in  the  narrow  limits  of  my  (late 

I  bound  my  hopes.     Which  if  Cajlara  daigne 

Once  to  entitle  hers  ;  the  wealthiefl  graine 

My  earth,  untild  fliall  beare ;  my  trees  fhall  grone 

Vnder  their  fruitfull  burthen,  and  at  one 

And  the  fame  feafon,  Nature  forth  fliall  bring 

Riches  of  Autumne,  plcafures  of  the  Spring. 

But  digge,  and  thou  flialt  finde  a  i)urer  Mine 

The  th'  Indians  boafl :  Tafle  of  this  generous  Vine, 

And  her  blood  f\\  eeter  will  than  Nectar  prove. 

Such  miracles  wait  on  a  noble  love. 

But  fliould  flie  fcorne  my  fuite,  I'le  tread  that  path 

Which  none  but  fome  flid  Fairy  beaten  hath. 

There  force  wrong'd  Fhi/omt/,  hearing  my  mone. 

To  figh  my  greater  griefes,  forget  her  owne. 

To    C  A  S  T  A  R  A, 

Inqzciring  why  I  loved  her. 

llHy  doth  the  flubborne  iron  prove 
So  gentle  to  th'  magnetique  Rone? 
How  know  you  that  the  orbs  doe  move  ; 
With  muficke  too  ?  flnce  heard  of  none  ? 
And  I  will  anfwer  why  I  love. 

'Tis  not  thy  vertues,  each  a  flarre 

Which  in  thy  foules  bright  fpheare  doe  fhine, 

Shooting  their  beauties  from  a  farre, 

To  make  each  gazers  heart  like  thine ; 

Our  vertues  often  Meteors  are. 

'Tis  not  thy  face,  I  cannot  fpie 

When  Poets  wcepe  fome  Virgins  death, 

That  Cupid  wantons  in  her  eye, 

Or  perfumes  vapour  from  her  breath, 

And  'mongfl  the  dead  thou  once  mufl  lie."^ 

1  And  there  must  once  thy  beauty  lie.     1634,  1635. 


24 

Nor  is't  thy  birth.     For  T  was  ne're 

So  vaine  as  in  that  to  delight : 

Which  ballance  it,  no  weight  doth  beare, 

Nor  yet  is  objedl  to  the  fight, 

But  onely  fils  the  vulgar  eare. 

Nor  yet  thy  fortunes  :  Since  I  know 

They  in  their  motion  like  the  Sea  : 

Ebbe  from  the  good,  to  the  impious  flow : 

And  so  in  flattery  betray, 

That,  raifmg  they  but  overthrow. 

And  yet  thefe  attributes  might  prove 
Fucll  enough  t'  enflame  defire ; 
But  there  was  fomething  from  above, 
Shot  without  reafons  guide,  this  fire. 
I  know,  yet  know  not,  why  I  love. 

To    C  A  S  T  A  R  A, 
Looking  upon  him. 

■Ransfix  me  with  that  flaming  dart 
Ith'  eye,  or  brefl,  or  any  part, 
So  thou,  Cajlara,  fpare  my  heart. 

The  cold  Cymerian  by  that  bright 
Warme  wound,  ith'  darkneffe  of  his  nighty 
Might  both  recover  heat,  and  light. 

The  rugged  Scythian  gently  move, 
]th'  whifpering  fliadow  of  fome  grove, 
That's  confecrate  to  fportive  Love. 

December  fee  the  Primrofe  grow, 
The  Rivers  in  foft  murmurs  flow, 
And  from  his  head  fliake  ofl"  his  fnow. 

And  crooked  age  might  feele  againe 

Thofe  heates,  of  which  youth  did  complaine, 

While  frefh  blood  fwels  each  withered  veync. 


25 

For  the  bright  luflre  of  thy  eyes, 
Which  but  to  warme  them  would  fufBce, 
May  burne  me  to  a  faciifice. 

^To  the  right  honoicrable  the  Coimteffe  of  Kr. 

Ing'd  with  delight  (yet  fuch  as  flill  doth  beare 
^hafle  vertucs  Ramp)  thofe  Children  of  the  yeere 
^     The  dayes,  hafle  nimbly;  and  while  as  they  (lie, 
Each  of  them  with  their  predeceffors  vie, 
Which  yeelds  mofl  pleafure ;  you  to  them  difpence. 
What  Time  loR  with  his  cradle,  innocence. 
So  I  (if  fancie  not  delude  my  fight,) 
See  often  the  pale  monarch  of  the  night, 
Diana,  'mong  her  nimphs.     For  every  quire 
Of  vulgar  ftarres,  who  lend  their  weaker  fire 
To  conquer  the  nights  chilneffe,  with  their  Qucenc, 
In  harmeleffe  revels  tread  the  happy  greene. 
But  I  who  am  profcrib'd  by  tyrant  love, 
Seeke  out  a  filent  exile  in  Ibme  grove. 
Where  nought  except  a  folitary  Spring, 
Was  ever  heard,  to  which  the  Nimphs  did  fmg 
Narciffus  obfequies  :  For  onely  there 
Is  mufique  apt  to  catch  an  am'rous  eare. 
Cajlara  !  oh  my  heart !     How  great  a  flame 
Did  even  flioot  into  me  with  her  name? 
CaJIara  hath  betray'd  me  to  a  zeale 
Which  thus  diflratfls  my  hopes.     Flints  may  conceale 
In  their  cold  veynes  a  fire.     But  I  whofe  heart 
By  Love's  diffolv'd,  nc're  pradlis'd  that  cold  art. 
But  truce  thou  warring  paffion,  for  Tie  now 
Madam  to  you  addreffe  this  folemne  vow. 
By  Vertue  and  your  felfe  (befl  friends)  I  finde 
In  the  interiour  province  of  your  minde 
Such  government :  That  if  great  men  obey 
Th'  example  of  your  order,  they  will  fway 
Without  reproofe.    For  onely  you  unite 
Honour  with  fweeteneffe,  vertue  with  delight 

1   To  the  right  hcfionrabie  ;//y  very  good  Lady, 
Anne  Countesse  0/  Ax.     1634,  1635. 


26 


Vpon  Castara's  frowne  or  f7nile. 

Earned  fhade  of  Tycho  Br  ache,  who  to  us, 
The  riars  propheticke  language  didfl  impart, 
And  even  in  Hfe  their  myReries  difcufle : 
'^  Cajlara  hath  o'rethrowne  thy  ftrongeft  art. 

When  cuftome  flruggles  from  her  beaten  path, 
Then  accidents  mufl  needs  uncertaine  be. 
For  if  Cajlara  fraile  ;  though  winter  hath 
Lock't  up  die  rivers  :  Summer's  warme  in  me. 

And  Flora  by  the  miracle  reviv'd, 

Doth  even  at  her  owne  beauty  wondring  fland. 

But  fliould  flie  frowne,  the  Northerne  wind  arriv'd, 

In  midfl  of  Summer,  leads  his  frozen  band  : 

Which  doth  to  yce  my  youthfuU  blood  congeale, 
Yet  in  the  midfl  of  yce,  Hill  flames  my  zeale. 


In     C  A  S  T  A  R  A, 

All  fortunes, 

lE  glorious  wits,  who  finde  then  Parian  flone, 
A  nobler  quarry  to  build  trophies  on,     [fame, 
PurchafL 'gainfl  conquer'd  time;  Go  court  loud 
^He  wins  it,  who  but  fnigs  Cajlara' s name? 
Afpiring  foules,  who  grow  but  in  a  Spring, 
Forc't  by  the  warmth  of  fome  indulgent  King : 
Know  if  Cajlara  Imile  :  I  dwell  in  it, 
And  vie  for  glory  with  the  Favorit. 
Ye  fonnes  of  avarice,  who  but  to  fliare 
Vncertaine  treafure  with  a  certain e  care. 
Tempt  death  in  th'  horrid  Ocean  :  I,  when  ere 
I  but  approach  her,  find  the  Indies  there. 

Heaven  brightefl  Saint,  kinde  to  my  vowes  made  thee 
Of  all  ambition  courts,  th'  Epitome. 


27 


Vpo7i  tJio light  C  A  s  T  A  R  A  viay  dye. 


1 F  fhe  fliould  dye,  (as  well  fufpecft  we  may, 
A  body  fo  compadl  fliould  ne're  decay) 
Her  brighter  foule  would  in  the  Moone  infpire 
More  chaflity,  in  dimmer  n.arres  more  fire. 

You  twins  q{  Lccda  (as  your  ])arents  are 

In  their  wild  luRs)  may  grow  irregular 

Now  in  your  motion  :  for  the  marriner 

Henceforth  fliall  onely  fleere  his  couife  by  her. 

And  when  the  zeale  of  after  time^  fliall  fpie 

Her  uncorrupt  ith'  hapi)y  marble  lie; 

Hie  rofes  in  her  cheekes  un withered, 

'Twill  turne  to  love,  and  dote  upon  the  dead. 
For  he  who  did  to  her  in  life  difpence 
A  heaven,  v/ill  banifli  all  corruption  thence. 


Time  to  the  moments,  on  fight 
^Castara. 


T^^OiOu  younger  children  of  your  father  fl.ay, 
""^^'liSwift  flying  moments  (which  divide  the  day 
Ij  \nd  with  your  number  meafure  out  the  yeare 
in  various  feafons)  flay  and  wonder  here. 


For  fince  my  cradle,  I  fo  bright  a  grace 
Ne're  faw,  as  you  fee  in  Cajlai-as  face ; 
Whom  nature  to  revenge  fome  youthfuU  crime 
Would  never  frame,  till  age  had  weakened  Time. 
Elfe  fpight  of  fate,  in  fome  faire  forme  of  clay 
My  youth  I'de  bodied,  thiowne  my  fythe  away, 
And  broke  my  glaffe.     But  flnce  that  cannot  be, 
rie  punifh  Nature  for  her  injurie. 

On  nimble  moments  in  your  journey  flie, 
CaJIara  fliall  like  me,  grow  old,  and  die. 

I  times.     1634. 


28 


To  a  friend  inquwing  her  name^  whom 
he  loved. 


Ond  Love  himfelfe  hopes  to  difgulfe 
From  view,  if  he  but  covered  hes, 
[th'  veile  of  my  tranfparent  eyes. 

Though  in  a  fmile  himfelfe  he  hide, 
Or  in  a  figh,  thou  art  fo  tride 
In  all  his  arts,  hee'le  be  difcride. 

I  mufl.  confeffe  (Deare  friend)  my  flame, 
Whofe  boafls  Cajlara  fo  doth  tame, 
That  not  thy  faith,  fhall  know  her  name. 

Twere  prophanation  of  my  zeale, 
If  but  abroad  one  whifper  fleale, 
They  love  betray,  who  him  reveale. 

In  a  darke  cave  which  never  eye 
Could  by  his  fubtleft  ray  defcry, 
It  doth  like  a  rich  minerall  lye. 

Which  if  fhe  with  her  flame  refine, 
I'de  force  it  from  that  obfcure  Mine, 
And  then  it  like  pure  fliould  fliine. 


A  Dialogue  betweene  3f)  0  p  t  and  Jf  ^  a  r  -C. 


/eare, 


Hecke  thy  forward  thoughts,  and  know 
Hymen  onely  joynes  their  hands; 
Who  with  even  paces  goe, 
'Shee  in  gold,  he  rich  in  lands. 

I^ope.  But  Caflara's  purer  fire, 

When  it  meetes  a  noble  flame : 
Shuns  the  fmoke  of  fuch  defire, 
loynes  with  love,  and  burnes  the  fame. 


29 

^care.  Yet  obedience  mufl  prevaile, 

They  who  o're  her  aclions  fway : 
Would  have  her  in  th'  Ocean  faile, 
And  contemne  thy  narrow  fea. 

^)opc.  Parents  lawes  mufl  beare  no  weight 
When  they  happineffe  prevent. 
And  our  fea  is  not  fo  (Ireight, 
Bac  it  roome  hath  for  content. 


Jfta.Xt.  Thoufand  hearts  as  vi6lims  fland, 
At  the  Altar  of  her  eyes. 
And  will  partiall  Hie  command, 
Onely  thine  for  facrifice  ? 

gope.  Thoufand  vi6tims  mufl  returne  ; 
Shee  the  purefl  will  defigne  : 
Choofe  Cafiara  which  fliall  burne, 
Choofe  the  purefl,  that  is,  mine. 

71?  C  V  p  I  D, 
Vpoii  a  dimple  in  C  a  s  T  A  R  a's  cheeke. 

S^Imble  boy  in  thy  warme  flight, 
What  cold  tyrant  dimm'd  thy  fight? 
Hadfl  thou  eyes  to  fee  my  faire, 
^  Thou  wouldfl  figh  thy  felfe  to  ayre  : 
Fearing  to  create  this  one, 
Nature  had  her  felfe  undone. 
But  if  you  when  this  you  heare 
Fall  downe  murdered  through  your  eare, 
Begge  of  love  that  you  may  have 
In  her  cheeke  a  dimpled  grave. 
Lilly,  Rofe,  and  Violet, 
Shall  the  perfum'd  Hearfe  befet 
While  a  beauteous  flieet  of  Lawne. 
O're  the  wanton  corps  is  drawn e  : 
And  all  lovers  ufe  this  breath ; 
"  Here  lies  Cupid  blefl  in  death. 


30 

Vpon  C  V  p  I  d'  s  death  and  buriall  in 
Castara's    cheeke 

Vpids  dead.     Who  would  not  dye, 

To  be  iiUerr'd  fo  neere  her  eye? 

Who  would  feare  the  fword,  to  have 

Such  an  Alabafler  grave  ? 
O're  which  two  bright  tapers  burne, 
To  give  light  to  the  beauteous  Vrnc. 
At  the  firfl  Cajlara  fmil'd, 
Thinking  Cupid  her  beguil'd, 
Onely  counterfeiting  death. 
But  when  Are  perceiv'd  his  breath 
Quite  expir'd  :  the  mournei'uU  Girle, 
To  entombe  the  boy  in  Pearle, 
Wept  fo  long ;  till  pittious  love^ 
From  the  aflies  of  this  Love, 
Made  ten  thoufand  Cupids  rife, 
But  confm'd  them  to  her  eyes  : 
Where  they  yet,  to  fhew  they  lacke 
No  due  forrow,  flill  weare  blacke. 
But  the  blacks  fo  glorious  are 
Which  they  mourne  in,  that  the  faire 
Quires  of  ilarres,  look  pale  and  fret, 
Seeing  themfelves  out  fliin'd  by  jet. 

To  Fame. 

Ly  on  thy  fwiftefl  wing,  ambitious  Fame, 
And  fpeake  to  the  cold  North  Caftards  name : 
I  Which  very  breath  will,  like  the  Eafl  wind,  bring 
The  temp'rate  warmth,  and  muficke  of  the  Spring. 
Then  from  the  Articke  to  th'  Antarticke  Pole, 
Hafle  nimbly  and  infpire  a  gentler  foule. 
By  naming  her,  ith'  torrid  South  ;  that  he 
May  milde  as  ZcpJiirus  coole  whifpers  be. 
Nor  let  the  Weft  where  heaven  already  joynes, 
The  vaflefl  Empire,  and  the  wealthieit  Mines  : 
Nor  th'  Eafl  in  pleafures  wanton,  her  condemnc, 
For  not  diftributing  her  gifts  on  them. 


CTajSt. 


3' 

For  fhe  with  want  would  have  her  bounty  meetc 
Loves  noble  charity  is  fo  difcreete. 

A  Dialogue  bdweaie  Jl  V  it  p  ll  1 1 1  ci7id 

(I  aj5 1  a  r  it. 

J^.rapli.  '^"i^rJ^JJlOfl  not  thou  CaJIara  read 

Am'rous  volumes  in  my  eyes? 
Doth  not  every  motion  plead 
'What  I'de  fliew,  and  yet  difguife  ? 
Sences  a(ft  each  others  part. 
Eyes,  as  tongues,  reveale  the  heart. 

I  faw  love,  as  lightning  breake 

From  thy  eyes,  and  was  content 

Oft  to  heare  thy  fjlence  fpeake. 

Silent  love  is  eloquent. 

So  the  fence  of  learning  heares, 
The  dumbe  muficke  of  the  Spheares. 

Then  there's  mercy  in  yourkinde, 
Liflning  to  an  unfain'd  love. 
Or  drives  he  to  tame  the  wind, 
Who  would  your  compaffion  move? 

No  y'are  pittious,  as  y're  faire. 

Heaven  relents,  o'recome  by  prayer. 

But  loofe  man  too  prodigall 
Is  in  the  expence  of  vowes  ; 
And  thinks  to  him  kingdomes  fall 
When  the  heart  of  woman  bowes  : 

Frailty  to  your  armes  may  yeeld; 

Who  refifLs  you,  wins  the  field. 

Triumph  not  to  fee  me  bleede. 
Let  the  Bore  chafed^  froiii  his  den, 
On  the  wounds  of  mankinde  feede. 
Your  foft  fexe  fliould  pitty  men. 
Malice  well  may  pra61;ife  Art, 
Lo\e  hath  a  tranfparent  heart. 

Yet  is  love  all  one  deceit, 
A  warme  frofl,  a  frozen  fire. 

1  chased.     1634,  1635. 


^rapl). 


€a$t. 


JLrapl). 


€aj5t. 


32 

She  within  her  felfe  is  great, 

Who  is  Have  to  no  defire. 

Let  youth  a6l,  and  age  advife, 
And  then  love  may  hnde  his  eyes. 

^rapl).  Hymens  torch  yeelds  a  dim  hght, 
When  ambition  joynes  our  hands. 
A  proud  day,  but  mournefull  night, 
She  fuflaines,  who  marries  lands. 

Wealth  flaves  man,  but  for  their  Ore, 
Th'  Indians  had  beene  free,  though  poore. 

CTa^t.     And  yet  wealth  the  fuell  is 

Which  maintaines  the  nuptiall  fire, 
And  in  honour  there's  a  bliffe. 
Th'  are  immortall  who  afpire. 

But  truth  fayes,  no  joyes  are  fweete, 
But  where  hearts  united  meete. 

^raplj.  Rofes  breath  not  fuch  a  fent. 

To  perfume  the  neighbr'ing  groves  ; 
As  when  you  affirme  content. 
In  no  fpheare  of  glory  moves. 
Glory  narrow  foules  combines  : 
Noble  hearts  Love  onely  joynes. 

To    C  A  S  T  A  R  A, 

Intendmg  a  jotirjiey  into  the  Counttey. 

Hy  hafle  you  hence  CaJJara}  can  the  earth, 
A  glorious  mother,  in  her  flowry  birth. 
Shew  Lillies  like  thy  brow  ?  Can  fhe  difclofe 
In  emulation  of  thy  cheeke,  a  Rofe, 
Sweete  as  thy  blufli  ?  Upon  thy  felfe  then  fet 
lull  value,  and  fcorne  it,  thy  counterfet. 
The  Spring's  flill  with  thee  ;  But  perhaps  the  field, 
Not  warm'd  with  thy  approach,  wants  force  to  yeeld, 
Her  tribute  to  the  Plough  ;  O  rather  let 
Th'  ingratefuU  earth  for  ever  be  in  debt 
To  th'  hope  of  fweating  induflry,  than  we 
Should  flarve  with  cold,  who  have  no  heat  but  thee. 
Nor  feare  the  publike  good.     Thy  eyes  can  give 
A  life  to  all,  who  can  deierve  to  live. 


{ 


33 

ypon  Castara's  departure. 

Am  engag'd  to  forrow,  and  my  heart 
F'eeles a  dillraclcd  rage.      Though  you  depart 
lAnd  leave  me  to  my  feares;  let  love  in  fpite 
Of  abfence,  our  divided  foules  unite. 
But  you  mufl  goe.     The  melancholy  Doves 
Draw  Venus  chariot  hence.     The  fportive  I.oves 
Which  wont  to  wanton  here,  hence  with  you  flye, 
And  like  falfe  friends  forfake  me  when  I  dye. 
For  but  a  walking  tombe,  what  can  he  be  ; 
Whofe  befl  of  life  is  forc't  to  part  with  thee  ? 

To    C  A  S  T  A  R  A, 

Vp07i  a  trembling  kiffe  at  dcparticre. 

[H'  Arabian  wind,  whofe  breathing  gently  blows 
j Purple  to  th'  Violet,  bluflies  to  the  Rofe; 
jJDid  never  yeeld  an  odour  rich  as  this. 
Why  are  you  then  fo  thrifty  of  a  kiffe, 
Authoriz'd  even  by  cuflome?    Why  doth  feare 
So  tremble  on  your  lip,  my  lip  being  neare  ? 
Thinke  you  I  ))arting  with  fo  fad  a  zeale, 
Will  a6l  fo  blacke  a  mifchiefe,  as  to  fleale 
Thy  Rofes  thence  ?     And  they,  by  this  device, 
Tranfplanted  :  fomewhere  elfe  force  Paradice  ? 
Or  elfe  you  feare,  left  you,  fliould  my  heart  skip 
Vp  to  my  mouth,  t'  incounter  with  your  lip, 
Might  rob  me  of  it :  and  be  judg'd  in  this, 
T'  have  ludas  like  betraid  me  with  a  kiffe. 

To    C  A  S  T  A  R  A, 

Looking  backe  at  her  departing, 

jOoke  backe  Cajlara.     From  thy  eye 
Let  yet  more  flaming  arrowes  flye. 
Po  live,  is  thus  to  burne  and  dye. 


For  what  might  glorous  hope  defire, 
But  that  thy  felfe,  as  I  expire. 
Should  bring  both  death  and  funerall  fir^? 

c 


34 

Diflradled  Love,  fhall  grieve  to  fee 
Such  zeale  in  death  :  For  fcare  left  he 
Himfelfe,  fhould  be  confumed  in  me. 

And  gathering  up  my  afhes,  weepe, 
That  in  his  teares  he  then  may  fleepe : 
And  thus  embahii'd,  as  reUques,  keepe. 

Thither  let  lovers  pilgrims  turne, 

And  the  loofe  flames  in  which  they  burne, 

Give  up  as  offerings  to  my  Vrne. 

That  them  the  vertue  of  my  flirine, 

By  miracle  fo  long  refine  ; 

Till  they  prove  innocent  as  mxine. 

Vpon  Castara's  ab fence,  \i 

Is  madneffe  to  give  Phyficke  to  the  dead  ; 

Then  leave  me  friends:  Yet  haply  you'd  here  read 

A  lecfture  ;  but  I'le  not  diffed'led  be, 

T'  inflrudl  your  Art  by  my  anatomic. 
But  flill  you  truft  your  fenfe,  fweare  you  difcry 
No  difference  in  me.     All's  deceit  oth'eye, 
Some  fpirit  hath  a  body  fram'd  in  th'  ayre, 
Like  mine,  which  he  doth  to  delude  you,  w^eare : 
Elfe  heaven  by  miracle  makes  me  furvive 
My  felfe,  to  keepe  in  me  poore  Love  alive. 
But  I  am  dead,  yet  let  none  quefLion  where 
My  befl  part  rells,  and  with  a  figh  or  teare, 
Prophane  the  Pompe,  when  they  my  corps  interre, 
My  foule  impardis'd,  for  'tis  vvith  her. 

To    C  A  S  T  A  R  A, 

Complaining  her  abfence  in  the  Country. 

He  leffer  people  of  the  ayre  confpire 
To  keepe  thee  from  me,  P/iilomel\w\X\\  higher 
And  fweeter  notes,  wooes  thee  to  weepe  her  rape. 
'Which  would  appeafe  the  gods,  and  change  lier 
The  early  Larke,  preferring  'fare  foft  refl  [fhape. 


35 

Obfcqiiious  duty,  leaves  his  downy  nefl, 
And  doth  to  tlice  harmonious  tribute  pay  ; 
Expecfting  from  thy  eyes  the  breake  of  day. 
From  which  the  Owle  is  frighted,  and  doth  rove 
(As  never  liaving  felt  the  warmth  of  love.) 
In  uncouth  vaults,  and  the  chill  fliades  of  night, 
Nor  biding  the  bright  luflre  of  thy  fight. 

With  him  my  f^ite  agrees.     Not  viewing  thee 
I'me  lofl  in  mifls,  at  befl,  but  meteors  fee. 

To  T  li  AMES. 

||Wift  in  tliy  watry  chariot,  courteous  TJiameSy 
jHall  by  the  happy  error  of  thy  flreames, 
I'l'o  kiffe  the  banks  oi  Marlow^  which  doth  fhow 
^Faire  Seyjuors,  and  beyond  that  never  flow. 
Then  fummon  all  thy  Swans,  that  who  did  give 
Muficke  to  death,  may  henceforth  fmg,  and  live. 
For  my  CaJIara.     She  can  life  reflore, 
Or  quicken  them  who  had  no  life  before. 
How  fliould  the  Poplar  elfe  the  Pine  provoke ; 
The  (lately  Cedar  challenge  the  rude  Oke 
To  dance  at  fight  of  her  ?     They  have  no  fcnfe 
From  nature  given,  but  by  her  influence. 

ilf  Orpheus  did  thofe  fenfleffe  creatures  move, 
He  was  a  Prophet,  and  fore-fang  my  love. 


mi 


To  the  right  honoicrable  the  Earle 

of    S  H  R  E  W  E  S."^ 

YlMufc  (great Lord) when  laflyou  heardherfm;:^ 
nii  to  your  Vncles  Vrne,  her  off'rings  bring: 
And  if  to  fame  I  may  give  faith,  your  eares 
Deiii^htcd  in  the  muficke  of  her  teares. 


That  was  her  debt  to  vertue.     And  when  e're 
She  her  bright  head  among  the  clouds  fliall  reare 
And  addc  to  th'  wondring  heavens  a  new  flame, 

1  If  C>;/^f7Ar  did  those  senslesse  creatures  stirre, 

He  was  a  Prophet,  and  fore-sang  of  her.     1634,  1635. 
*  To  iht  Right  Honourable  my  very  good  Lord ^  I  o  H  N  Earle  0/%.    1634, 16^5 


36 

Shee'le  celebrate  the  Genius  of  your  name. 

Wilde  with  another  rage,  infpir'd  by  love, 

She  charmes  the  Myrtles  of  the  Idalian  grove. 

And  while  flie  gives  the  Cyprian  ftormes  a  law, 

Thofe  wanton  Doves  which  Cyt/iej-eia  draw 

Through  th'am'rous  ayre :  Admire whatpower  dothfway 

The  Ocean,  and  arrefl  them  in  their  way. 

She  fmgs  Cajiara  then.     O  fhe  more  bright, 

Than  is  the  ftarry  Senate  of  the  night ; 

Who  in  their  motion  did  like  flraglers  erre, 

Caufe  they  deriv'd  no  influence  from  her, 

W'ho's  conftant  as  flie's  chafle.     The  Sinne  hathbeenc 

Clad  Hke  a  neighb'ring  fliepheard  often  feene 

To  hunt  thofe  Dales,  in  hope  then  Daphnes,  there 

To  fee  a  brighter  face.     Th'  AfLrologer 

In  th'  interim  dyed,  whofe  proud  Art  could  not  fhow 

Whence  that  Ecclipfe  did  on  the  fudden  grow. 

A  wanton  Satyre  eager  in  the  chafe 

Of  fome  faire  Nimph,  beheld  CaJlarcCs  face, 

And  left  his  loofe  purfuite  ;  who  while  he  ey'd, 

Vnchaftely,  fuch  a  beauty,  glorified 

With  fuch  a  vertue ;  by  heavens  great  commands 

Turn'd  marble,  and  there  yet  a  Statute  flands. 

As  Poet  thus.     But  as  a  Christian  now, 

And  by  my  zeale  to  you  (my  Lord)  I  vow. 

She  doth  a  flame  fo  pure  and  facred  move; 

In  me  impiety  'twere  not  to  love. 

7"t?   C  V  p  I  D. 
WifJiiiig  a  fpeedy  paffage  to  C  A  s  T  A  R  A. 

Hankes  Ciipid,  but  the  Coach  of  F?;2?/j"  moves 
For  me  too  flow,  drawn  but  by  lazie  Doves. 
I,  lefl.  a  journey  my  delay  fliould  finde, 
Will  leape  into  the  chariot  of  the  winde. 
Swift  as  the  flight  of  lightning  through  the  ayre, 
Hee'le  hurry  me  till  I  approach  the  faire 
But  unkinde  Seymoi^s.     Thus  he  will  proclaime, 
What  tribute  winds  owe  to  CaJIara's  name. 


37 

Viewing  this  prodigie,  adonifht  they, 

Who  firll  accelie  deny'd  me,  will  obey, 

With  feare  what  love  commands  :  Yet  cerifure  me 

As  guilty  of  the  blackefl  forccry. 

But  after  to  my  wiflies  milder  prove  : 
When  they  know  this  the  miracle  of  love. 

To     C  A  S  T  A  R  A. 

Of  Love. 


\m 


fOw  fancie  mockesme?    By  th'  effe6l  I  prove, 
"Twas  am'rous  folly,  wings  afcrib'd  to  love, 
And  ore  th'  obedient  elements  command. 
Hee's  lame  as  he  is  blinde,  for  here  I  fland 
Fixt  as  the  earth.      Throw  then  this  Idoll  downe 
Yee  lovers  who  firfl  made  it ;  which  can  frowne 
Or  fmile  but  as  you  pleafe.     But  I'me  untame 
In  rage.     Cafiara  call  thou^  on  his  name, 
And  though  hee'Ie  not  beare  up  my  vowes  to  thee, 
Hee'le  triumph  to  bring  downe  my  Saint  to  me. 

To  the  Spring, 

Vpon  the  tcncei'tainty  of  (Z x'^i: k^ ^'$>  abode. 

Ct^^^AireMiflreffe  of"  the  earth,  with  garlandscrown'd 
r!  r^fy  iRi^^j^y^  lovers  charme,  from  the  parcht  ground, 
yA^2 1  And  fliew  thy  flowry  wealth :  that  fhe,  where  ere 
Her  flarres  fliall  guide  her,  meete  thy  beauties 
Should  flie  to  the  cold  Norlherne  climates  goe,  [there. 
Force  thy  affrighted  Lillies  there  to  grow; 
Thy  Rofes  in  thofe  gelid  fields  t'  appeare; 
She  abfent,  1  have  all  their  AV inter  here. 
Or  if  to  the  torrid  Zone  her  way  flie  bend, 
Her  the  coole  breathing  of  Favouius  lend, 
Thither  command  the  birds  to  bring  their  quires. 
That  Zone  is  temp'rate.     I  have  all  his  fires. 

Attend  her,  courteous  Spring,  though  wefhould  here 
Lofe  by  it  all  the  treafurcs  of  the  yeere. 

1  then.  1634.  2  to.  1634,  1635. 


3S 

To  Reafon, 

Vpo7t  C  A  s  T  A  R  a's  abfeiice, 

Ith  your  calme  precepts  goe,  and  lay  a  florme, 
Infomebrefl  flegmaticke  which  would  conforme 
I  Her  life  to  your  cold  lawes  :  In  vain  y'  engage 
■"Your  felfe  on  me.     I  will  obey  my  rage. 
Shee's  gone,  and  I  am  lofl.     Some  unknowne  grove 
I'le  finde,  whereby  the  miracle  of  Love 
rie  turne  t'  a  fountaine,  and  divide  the  yeere, 
By  numbring  every  moment  with  a  teare. 
Where  if  Cajlara  (to  avoyd  the  beames 
Oth'neighb'ring  Sun)  fliall  wandring  meete  niy  flreames. 
And  tafling,  hope  her  thirfL  alaid  lliall  be, 
Shee'le  feele  a  fudden  flame,  and  burne  like  me  : 
And  thus  diftradled  cry.     Tell  me  thou  cleere, 
But  treach'rous  Fount,  what  lover's  cofiin'd  here? 

An^  anfwere  /^Castara's  quejlion, 

^'Is  I  Caflara^  who  when  thou  wert  gone, 
Did  freeze  into  this  melancholy  ftone, 
To  weepe  the  minutes  of  thy  abfence.    Where 
Can  greefe  have  freer  fcope  to  mourne  than  here  ? 
The  Tarke  here  pra6lifeth  a  fweeter  flraine, 
Auroras  early  blufli  to  entertaine. 
And  having  too  deepe  tafled  of  thefe  flreames. 
He  loves,  and  amoroufly  courts  her  beames. 
The  courteous  turtle  with  a  wandring  zeale, 
Saw  how  to  flone  I  did  my  felfe  congeale, 
And  murm'ring  askt  what  power  this  change  did  move. 
The  language  of  my  waters  whifpered,  Love. 
And  thus  transform'd  He  fland,  till  I  fhiall  fee, 
That  heart  fo  flon'd  and  frozen,  thaw'd  in  thee. 

1  /;/.     1634- 


39 
To    C  A  S  T  A  R  A. 

Vpon  llie  difgiiijlng  his  affcHion. 

Ronoimce  me  guilty  of  a  Blacker  crime, 
Then  e're  in  the  large  Volume  writ  by  Time, 
iThe  fid  Hiflorian  reacles,  if  not  my  Art 
Diffembles  love,  to  veile  an  am'rcus  heart. 
For  when  the  zealous  anger  of  my  friend 
Checkes  my  unufuall  fadneffe  :  I  pretend 
To  lludy  vertue,  which  indeede  I  doe, 
He  mufl  court  vertue  who  afpires  to  you. 
Or  that  fome  friend  is  dead  and  then  a  teare, 
A  figh  or  groane  fleales  from  me :  for  I  feare 
Left  death  with  love  hath  flrooke  my  heart,  and  all 
Thefe  forrowes  uflier  but  its  funerall. 
iWhich  fliould  revive,  fliould  there  you  a  mourner  be, 
And  force  a  nuptiall  in  an  obfequie. 

To  the  hoiioitrahle  my  honozircd  kinfnian. 
]\Ir.   G.   T. 

Hrice  hath  the  pale-fac'd  Empreffe  of  the  night, 
Lent  in  her  chafle  increafe  her  borrowed  light, 
To  guide  the  vowing  Mariner:  fmce  mute 
^Talbot  th'afl  beene,  too  flothfull  to  falute 
Thy  exil'd  fervant.     Labour  not  t'  excufe 
This  dull  neglecfl :  Love  never  wants  a  Mufe. 
When  thunder  fummons  from  eternall  fleepe 
Th'  imprifon'd  ghofls,  and  fpreads  oth'  frighted  deepe, 
A  veile  of  darkneffe;  penitent  to  be 
I  may  forget,  yet  flill  remember  thee. 
Next  to  my  faire,  under  whofe  eye-lids  move, 
In  nimble  meafurcs  beauty,  wit,  and  love. 
Nor  thinke  Cajlara  (though  the  fexe  be  fraile, 
And  ever  like  uncertaine  veffels  faile 
On  th'  ocean  of  their  paffions;  while  each  wind 
Triumphs  to  fee  their  more  uncertaine  mind,) 
Can  be  induc't  to  alter:  Every  Rarre 
May  in  its  motion  grow  irregular ; 

1  Which  would  revive,  should  you  there  mourner  be.     1634.  16^ 


40 

The  Sunne  forget  to  yeeld  his  welcome  flame  ^ 

To  th'  teeming  earth,  yet  flie  remaine  the  fame.  fH 

And  in  my  armes  (if  Poets  may  divine)  T 

I  once  that  world  of  beauty  fliall  intwine, 

And  on  her  lips  print  volumes  of  my  love, 

Without  a  froward  checke,  and  fweetly  move 

Ith'  Labyrinth  of  delight.     If  not,  lie  draw 

Her  picture  on  my  heart,  and  gently  thaw 

With  warmth  of  zeale,  untill  I  heaven  entreat, 

To  give  true  life  to  th'  ayery  counterfeit. 

Eccho  to  Narclffus. 
Inpraife  of  Z  k'^t  KV.  ^  '^  difcreete  Love. 

ICorn'd  in  thy  watry  Vrne  Narciffus  lye, 
iThou  (halt  not  force  more  tribute  from  my  eye 
JjT'  increafe  thy  fLreames:  or  make  me  weepe  a 
fhowre. 

To  adde  frefh  beauty  to  thee,  now  a  flowre. 

But  fliould  relenting  heaven  reflore  thee  fence, 

To  fee  fuch  wifedome  temper  innocence. 

In  faire  Cajlara's  love ;  how  flie  difcrect, 

Makes  caution  with  a  noble  freedome  meete, 

At  the  fame  moment ;  thould'fl  confeffe  fond  boy, 

Fooles  onely  think  them  vertuous,  who  are  coy. 

And  wonder  not  that  I,  who  have  no  choyce 

Of  fpeech,  have  prayfmg  her  fo  free  a  voyce  : 

Heaven  her  feverefl  fentence  doth  repeale, 

When  to  Cajlara  I  would  fpeake  my  zeale. 

To    C  A  S  T  A  R  A, 

Being  debarrd  her  prefence. 

Anifht  from  you,  I  charg'd  the  nimble  winde, 
My  unfeene  Meffenger,  to  fpeake  my  minde, 
In  am'rous  whifpers  to  you.    But  my  Mufe 
Left  the  unruly  fpirit  fliould  abufe 

The  trufl:  repos'd  in  him,  fayd  it  was  due 

To  her  alone,  to  fmg  my  loves  to  you. 

Heare  her  then  fpeake.     Bright  Lady,  from  whofe  eye 


4^ 

Shot  lightning  to  his  heart,  who  joyes  to  dye 

A  martyr  in  your  flames  :  O  let  your  love 

Be  great  and  firme  as  his  :  Then  nought  fliall  move 

Your  felled  faiths,  that  both  may  grow  together : 

Or  if  by  Fate  divided,  both  may  wither. 

Hark  !  'twas  a  groan e.     Ah  how  fad  abfence  rends 

His  troubled  thoughts!  See,  he  from  Marloiu  fends 

His  eyes  to  Scymors.     Then  chides  th'  envious  trees, 

And  unkinde  diflance.     Yet  his  fancie  fees 

And  courts  your  beauty,  joyes  as  he  had  cleav'd 

Clofe  to  yoU;  and  then  weepes  bccaufe  deceiv'd. 

Be  conflant  as  y'are  faire.     For  I  fore-fee 

A  glorious  triumph  waits  o'th  vi6lorie 

Your  love  will  purchafe,  fliewing  us  to  prize 

A  true  content.    There  onely  Love  hath  eyes. 

To  Seymors, 
The  hoiife  in  wJiick  C  a  s  T  A  R  A  lived. 


^  Lefl  Temple,  haile,  where  the  Chafl  Altar  flands, 
j  Which  Nature  built,  but  the  exad:er  hands 
I  Of  Vcrtue  poliflit.  Though  fad  Fate  deny 
My  prophane  feete  acceffe,  my  vowes  fliall  flye. 
May  thofe  Mufitians,  which  divide  the  ayre 
With  their  harmonious  breath,  their  flight  prepare, 
For  this  glad  place,  and  all  their  accents  frame, 
To  teach  the  Eccho  my  Cajiaj'a's  name. 
The  beautious  troopes  of  graces  led  by  love 
In  chafl.e  attempts,  poffeffe  the  neighb'ring  grove 
Where  may  the  S])ring  dwell  flill.    May  every  tree 
Tume  to  a  Laurell,  and  propheticke  be. 
Which  fliall  in  iis  flrfl  Oracle  divine, 
That  courteous  Fate  decree  CaJIara  mine. 

To  the  Dew, 
In  hope  to  fee  C  a  s  T  a  R  A  walking. 

Right  Dew  which  dofl.  the  field  adorne 
As  th'  earth  to  welcome  in  the  niorne, 
Would  hang  a  Jewell  on  each  corne. 


42 

Did  not  the  pittious  night,  whofe  eares 
Have  oft  beene  confcious  of  my  feares, 
Diflill  you  from  her  eyes  as  teares  ? 

Or  that  Cajiara  for  your  zeale, 
When  flie  her  beauties  fliall  reveale, 
Might  you  to  Dyamonds  congeale? 

If  not  your  pity,  yet  how  ere 

Your  care  I  praife,  'gainfl  flie  appeare, 

To  make  the  wealtliy  Indies  here. 

But  fee  fhe  comes.     Bright  lampe  oth'  skie, 
Put  out  thy  hght :  the  world  fhall  fpie, 
A  fairer  Sunne  in  either  eye. 

And  hquid  Pearle,  hang  heavie  now 
On  every  graffe  that  it  may  bow 
In  veneration  of  her  brow. 

Yet  if  the  wind  fliould  curious  be, 
And  were  I  here,  fliould  queflion  thee, 
Hee's  full  of  whifpers,  fpeak  not  me. 

But  if  the  bufie  tell-tale  day, 
Our  happy  enterview  betray ; 
Lefl  thou  confeffe  too,  melt  away. 

7'^    C  A  S  T  A  R  A. 


Tay  under  the  kinde  fliadow  of  this  tree 
Ca/Iara,  and  protect  thy  felfe  and  me  [Kings, 
'  From  the  Sunn es ray es.  Which  fhew  the  grace  of 
'A  dangerous  warmth  with  too  much  favour 
How  happy  in  this  fliade  the  humble  Vine        [brings. 
Doth  'bout  fome  taller  tree  her  felfe  intwine. 
And  fo  growes  fruitefull ;  teaching  us  her  fate 
Doth  beare  more  fweetes, though  Cedars  beare  more  flate: 
Behold  Adonis  in  yand'  purple  flowre, 
T'was  Venus  love  :  That  dew,  the  briny  fhowre, 
His  coyneffe  wept,  while  flmgling  yet  alive  : 
Now  he  repents,  and  gladly  would  revive, 

By  th'  vertue  of  your  chafle  and  powerful!  charmcs, 
To  play  the  modeft  wanton  in  your  armes. 


43 


To    Cast  a  r  a, 

Vent  ring  to  zuaike  too  far  re  hi  the  neigh- 
bo7irino  wood. 

|Are  not  too  flirre  CaJJara^  for  the  fliade 
This  courteous  thicket  yeelds,  hath  man  betray'd 
A  jjrey  to  wolves :  to  thewildepowers  oth'wood, 
'Oft  travellers  pay  tribute  with  their  blood. 
If  carcleffc  of  thy  feife  of  me  take  care, 
For  like  a  fliip  where  all  the  fortunes  are 
Of  an  advent'rous  merchant ;  I  mufl  be, 
If  thou  Hiouldfl  perifli  banquerout  in  thee. 
My  feares  have  mockt  me.     Tygers  when  they  fhall 
Behold  fo  bright  a  face,  will  humbly  fall 
In  adoration  of  thee.     Fierce  they  are 
To  the  deform'd,  obfequious  to  the  faire. 
Yet  venter  not ;  tis  nobler  farre  to  fway 
The  heart  of  man,  than  beads,  who  man  obey. 

Vpon  Castara's  departure. 

Owes  are  vaine.     No  fuppliant  breath 

Stayes  the  fpeed  of  fwift-heel'd  death. 

Life  with  her  is  gone  and  I 

J.earne  but  a  new  way  to  dye. 
See  the  flowers  condole,  and  all 
Wither  in  my  funerall. 
The  bright  Lilly,  as  if  day, 
Parted  with  her,  fades  away. 
Violets  hang  their  heads,  and  lofe 
All  their  beauty.     That  the  Rofe 
A  fad  part  in  forrow  beares, 
Witneffe  all  thofe  dewy  teares, 
Which  as  Pearle,  or  Dyamond  like, 
Swell  upon  her  blufliing  cheeke. 
All  things  mourne,  but  oh  behold 


44 

How  the  wither'd  Marigold 
Clofeth  up  now  fhe  is  gone, 
Judging  her  the  fetting  Sunne. 


fag!)!. 


A   Dialogue  betwcene 
fl  i  g  li  t  and  ^  r  a  p  It  i  L 

£  Et  filence  clofe  my  troubled  eyes, 

Thy  feare  in  Lethe  fleepe  : 
liThe  flarres  bright  cent'nels  of  the  skies, 
Watch  to  lecure  thy  fleepe. 


^rapl}.  The  Norths  unruly  fpirit  lay 
In  the  diforder'd  Seas  : 
Make  the  rude  Winter  calme  as  May\ 
And  give  a  lover  eafe. 

^lgl)t.  Yet  why  fliould  feare  with  her  pale  charmes, 
Bewitch  thee  fo  to  griefe  ? 
Since  it  prevents  n'  infuing  harmes, 
Nor  yeelds  the  pafl  reliefe. 

^rapl).  And  yet  fuch  horror  I  fuflaine 
As  the  fad  veffell,  when 
Rough  tempeO-S  have  incenfl  the  Maine, 

Her  Harbor  now  in  ken.  1 

5 
;piQl)t.  No  conquefl  weares  a  glorious  wreath 

Which  dangers  not  obtaine  : 
Let  tempefls  'gainfl,  thee  fliipwracke  breathe, 
Thou  flialt  thy  harbour  gaine. 

^rapl).  Truths  Delphos  doth  not  ftill  foretell, 
Though  Sol  th'  infpirer  be. 
How  then  fliould  night  as  blind  as  hell, 
Enfuing  truths  fore-fee  ? 

Jligl)!  The  Sunne  yeelds  man  no  conflant  flame. 
One  light  thofe  Priefls  infpires. 
While  I  though  black  e  am  flill  the  fame, 
And  have  ten  thoufand  fires. 


45 

^rapl).  But  thofe,  fayes  ir.y  propheticke  feare, 
As  funerall  torches  burne; 
While  thou  thy  felfe  the  blackes  doR  vveare, 
T'  attend  me  to  my  Vrne. 

fCigljt.  Thy  feares  abufe  thee,  for  thofe  h'glits 
In  Hymens  Church  fliall  fliuie, 
When  he  by  th'  myflery  of  his  rites, 
Shall  make  CaJJara  thine. 

To  the  Right  Honoiifablej  the  Lady,  E.  P. 

Our  judgement's  cleere,  not  wrinckled  with  the 
Time, 

On  th'  humble  fate  :  which  cenfures  it  a  crime, 
^  I'o  be  by  vertue  ruin'd.     For  I  know 
Y'are  not  fo  various  as  to  ebbe  and  flow 
Itir  flreame  of  fortune,  whom  each  faithleffe  winde 
Diflracfts,  and  they  who  made  her,  fram'd  her  blinde. 
Poffeffion  makes  us  poore.     Should  we  obtaine 
All  thofe  bright  jems,  for  which  ith'  wealthy  Maine, 
The  tann'd  flave  dives ;  or  in  one  boundleffe  cheft 
Imprifon  all  die  treafures  of  the  Wefl, 
We  dill  fliould  want.     Our  better  part's  immence, 
Not  like  th'  inferiour,  limited  by  fence. 
Rich  with  a  little,  mutuall  love  can  lift 
Vs  to  a  greatn^ffe,  whether  chance  or  thrifc 
E're  rais'd  her  fervants.     For  though  all  were  fpent, 
That  can  create  an  Europe  in  content. 
Thus  (Madam)  when  CaJIara  lends  an  eare 
Soft  to  my  hope,  I  Loves  Philofopher, 
Winne  on  her  faitli.     For  when  I  wondring  fland 
At  th'  intermingled  beauty  of  her  hand, 
(Higher  I  dare  not  gaze)  to  this  bright  veine 
I  not  afcribe  the  blood  of  Chaileniaine 
Deriv'd  by  you  to  her.     Or  fay  there  are 
In  that  and  th'other  Ma7-inion,  Rojfe,  and  Parr 
Fitzhi/gh,  Saint  Qj/intin,  and  the  rell  of  them 
That  adde  fuch  luflre  to  great  Pembrokes  Rem. 


^6 

My  love  is  envious.     Would  Cajiara  were 
The  daughter  of  fome  mountaine  cottager, 
Who  with  his  toile  worne  out,  could  dying  leave 
Her  no  more  dovvre,  than  what  fhe  did  receive 
From  bounteous  nature.     Her  would  I  then  lead 
To  th'  Temple,  rich  in  her  owne  wealth  ;  her  head 
Crown'd  with  her  haires  faire  treafure ;  diamonds  in 
Her  brighter  eyes;  foft  Ermines  in  her  skin; 
Each  Indie  in  each  clieeke.     Then  all  who  vaunt, 
That  fortune,  them  t'  enrich,  made  others  want, 
Should  fet  themfelves  out  glorious  in  her  flealth, 
And  trie  if  that,  could  parallel  this  wealth. 


To    C  A  S  T  A  R  A. 

Departiitg  ztpon  the  appf  oach  of  Night. 

Hatfhouldwe  feare  Cafla7'a>     The  coole  aire, 
That's  falne  in  love,  and  wanton  in  thy  haire, 
Will  not  betray  our  whifpers.    Should  I  fteale 
A  Neclar'd  kiffe,  the  wind  dares  not  reveale 
The  pleafure  I  poffeffe.     The  wind  confpires 
To  our  blefl  interview,  and  in  our  fires 
Bath's  like  a  Salamander,  and  doth  fip, 
Like  Bacchus  from  the  grape,  life  from  thy  lip. 
Nor  thinke  of  nights  approach.     The  worlds  great  eye 
Though  breaking  Natures  law,  will  us  fupply 
With  his  fLill  flaming  lampe  :  and  to  obey 
Our  chafLe  defires,  fix  here  perpetuall  day. 
But  fliould  he  fet,  what  rebell  night  dares  rife, 
To  be  fubdu'd  ith'  vi6l'ry  of  thymes? 


Vi 


An  Apparition. 

Ore  welcome  my  CaJIara,  then  was  light 
To  the  difordered  Chaos.     O  what  bright 
Vndnimble  chariot  brought  thee  through  the  aire? 
While  the  amazed  flars  to  fee  fo  faire 


47 

And  pure  a  beauty  from  the  earth  arife, 
Chang'd  all  their  glorious  bodies  into  eyes. 
O  let  my  zealous  lip  print  on  thy  hand 
The  flory  of  my  love,  which  there  fliall  fland 
A  bright  infcription  to  be  read  by  none, 
But  who  as  I  love  thee,  and  love  but  one. 
Why  vanifli  you  away  ?     Or  is  my  fenfe 
Deluded  by  my  hope?     O  fweete  offence 
Of  erring  nature  !     And  would  heaven  this  had 
Beene  true ;  or  that  I  thus  were  ever  mad. 


^To  the  Hoiio7trabIe  Mr  W"\  E. 


II 


jlEe  who  is  good  is  happy.     Let  the  loude 
Artillery  of  Heaven  breake  through  a  cloude 
And  dart  its  thunder  at  him ;  hee'le  remaine 
Vnmov'd,  and  nobler  comfort  entertaine 


In  welcomming  th'  ai)proach  of  death;  then  vice 

Ere  found  in  her  fictitious  Paradife. 

Time  mocks  our  youth,  and  (while  we  number  pad 

Delights,  and  raife  our  appetite  to  taRe 

Enfuing)  brings  us  to  uniiattered  age. 

Where  we  are  left  to  fatisfie  the  rage 

Of  threatning  Death  :  Pompe,  beauty,  wealth,  and  all 

Our  friendfhips,  fhrinking  from  the  funerall. 

The  thought  of  this  begets  that  brave  difdaine 

With  which  thouview'fl  the  world  and  makes  thofevaine 

Treafures  of  fancy,  ferious  fooles  fo  court. 

And  fweat  to  purchafe,  thy  contempt  or  fport. 

What  fhould  we  covet  here  ?     Why  interpofe 

A  cloud  twixt  us  and  heaven?     Kind  Nature  chofe 

Mansfouleth'  Exchccquer  Vvhcrefhe'd  hoord  herweaith, 

And  lodge  all  her  rich  fecrets ;  but  by  th'  flealth 

Of  our  owne  vanity,  v/are  left  fo  poore, 

The  creature  meerely  fcnfuall  knowes  more 

The  learn'd  Halcyon  by  her  wifedome  finds 

A  gentle  feafon,  when  the  feas  and  winds 

1  To  tlie  Honourable  my  most  Jwnoured friend^  W".  E.  Enquire.     1635. 


48 

Are  filenc't  by  a  calme,  and  then  brings  forth 
The  happy  miracle  of  her  rare  birth, 
Leaving  with  wonder  all  our  arts  poffeR, 
That  view  the  archite6liire  of  her  nefl. 
Pride  raifeth  us  'bove  juflice.     We  beflowe 
Increafe  of  knowledge  on  old  minds,  whicti  grow 
By  age  to  dotage  :  while  the  fenfitive 
Part  of  the  World  in  it's  firfl  flrength  doth  live. 
Folly  ?  what  dofl  thou  in  thy  power  contain e 
Deferves  our  Rudy  ?     Merchants  plough  the  maine 
And  bring  home  th'  Indies,  yet  afpire  to  more, 
By  avarice  in  the  poffeffion  poore. 
And  yet  that  Idoll  wealth  we  all  admit 
Into  the  foules  great  teniple.     Bufie  wit 
Invents  new  Orgies,  fancy  frames  new  rites 
To  fliow  it's  fuperflition,  anxious  nights 
Are  watcht  to  win  its  favour  :  while  the  beaft 
Content  with  Natures  courtefie  doth  red. 
Let  man  then  boafl  no  more  a  foule,  fmce  he 
Hath  loll  that  great  prerogative.     But  thee 
(Whom  Fortune  hath  exempted  from  the  heard 
Of  vulgar  men,  whom  vertue  hath  prefer'd 
Farre  higher  than  thy  birth)  I  mufl  commend, 
Rich  in  the  purchafe  of  fo  fweete  a  friend. 
And  though  my  fate  condu(Sls  me  to  the  fliade 
Of  humble  quiet,  my  ambition  payde 
With  fafe  content,  while  a  pure  Virgin  fame 
Doth  raife  me  trophies  in  CaJiarcHs  name. 
No  thought  of  glory  fwelling  me  above 
The  hope  of  being  famed  for  vertuous  love. 
Yet  wiffi  I  thee,  guided  by  the  better  flarres 
To  purchafe  unfafe  honour  in  the  warres 
Or  envied  fmiles  at  court ;  for  thy  greai  race, 
And  merits,  well  may  challenge  th'  high  eft  place. 
Yet  know,  what  bufie  path  fo-ere  you  tre.id 
To  greatneffe,  you  mufl  fleepe  among  the  dead. 


49^ 

To    C  A  S  T  A  R  A, 

The  va7iity  of  Avarice. 

Arke  ?  how  the  traytor  wind  doth  court 

The  Saylors  to  the  maine ; 
To  make  their  avarice  his  fport  ? 
A  tempefl  checks  the  fond  difdaine, 
They  beare  a  fafe  though  humble  port. 

Wee'le  fit  my  love  upon  the  Ihore, 

And  while  proud  billowes  rife 
To  warre  againfl  the  skie,  fpeake  ore 
Our  Loves  fo  facred  mifleries. 
And  charme  the  Sea  to  th'  calme  it  had  beforq 

Where's  now  my  pride  t'  extend  my  fame 

Where  ever  flatues  are  ? 
And  purchafe  glory  to  my  name 
In  the  fmooth  court  or  rugged  warre  ? 
My  love  hath  layd  the  Devill,  I  am  tame. 

I'de  rather  like  the  violet  grow 

Vnmarkt  i'th  fhaded  vale, 
Then  on  the  hill  thofe  terrors  know 
Are  breath'd  forth  by  an  angry  gale, 
There  is  more  pompe  above,  more  fweete  below. 

Love,  thou  divine  Philofopher 

(While  covetous  Landlords  rent, 
And  Courtiers  dignity  preferre) 
Inflrudls  us  to  a  fweete  content, 
Greatneffe  it  felfe,  doth  in  it  felfe  interre. 

Cajlara^  what  is  there  above 
The  treafures  we  poffeffe  ? 
We  two  are  all  and  one,  wee  move 
Like  flarres  in  th'  orbe  of  happineffe. 
All  bleffmgs  are  Epitomiz'd  in  Love. 


5° 


To  my  \moJi\  honoured  Friend  and 
Kinfman^  R.  St.,  Ef quire. 


Tfhall  not  grieve  me  (friend)  though  what  I  write 


Be  held  no  wit  at  Court.     If  I  deHght 
So  farre  my  fullen  Genius,  as  to  raife 
'it  pleafure ;  I  have  money,  wine,  and  bayes 
Enough  to  crowne  me  Poet.     Let  thofe  wits, 
Who  teach  their  Mufe  the  art  of  Parafits 
To  win  on  eafie  greatneffe ;  or  the  yongue 
Spruce  Lawyer  who's  all  impudence  and  tongue 
Sweat  to  divulge  their  fames  :  thereby  the  one 
Gets  fees ;  the  other  hyre,  I'me  befl  vnknowne  : 
Sweet  filence  I  embrace  thee,  and  thee  Fate 
Which  didfl  my  birth  fo  wifely  moderate ; 
That  I  by  want  am  neither  vilified, 
Nor  yet  by  riches  flatter'd  into  pride. 
Refolve  mie  friend  (for  it  muft  folly  be 
Or  elfe  revenge  'gainft  niggard  Deflinie, 
That  makes  fome  Poets  raile  ?)     Why  are  their  times 
So  fleept  in  gall  ?     Why  fo  obrayde  the  times  ? 
As  if  no  fin  call'd  downe  heav'ns  vengeance  more 
Then  caufe  the  world  leaves  fome  few  writers  poore  ? 
Tis  true,  that  Chapmans  reverend  afhes  mull 
Lye  rudely  mingled  with  the  vulgar  duft, 
Caufe  carefuU  heyers  the  wealthy  onely  have ; 
To  build  a  glorious  trouble  o're  the  grave. 
Yet  doe  I  not  defpaire,  fome  one  may  be 
So  ferioufly  devout  to  Poefie 
As  to  tranflate  his  reliques,  and  finde  roome 
In  the  warme  Church,  to  build  him  up  a  tombe. 
Since  Spe^icer  hath  a  Stone ;  and  Drayto7is  browes 
Stand  petrified  ith'  wall,  with  Laurell  bowes 
Yet  girt  about ;  and  nigh  wife  Henries  herfe. 
Old  Chaucer  got  a  Marble  for  his  verfe. 
So  courteous  is  Death ;  Death  Poets  brings 
So  high  a  pompe,  to  lodge  them  with  their  Kings : 
Yet  flill  they  mutiny.     If  this  man  pleafe 
His  filly  Patron  with  Hyperboles. 


51 

Or  mod  myflerious  non-fence,  give  his  braine 

But  the  flrapado  in  fome  wanton  flraine ; 

Hee'le  fweare  the  State  lookes  not  on  men  of  parts 

And,  if  but  mention'd,  flight  all  other  Arts. 

Vaine  oRentation  !  Let  us  fet  fo  jufl 

A  rate  on  knowledge,  that  the  world  may  trufl 

The  Poets  Sentence,  and  not  flill  aver 

Each  Art  is  to  it  felfe  a  flatterer. 

I  write  to  you  Sir  on  this  theame,  becaufe 

Your  foule  is  cleare,  and  you  obferve  the  lawes, 

Of  Poefie  fo  juRly,  that  I  chufe 

Yours  onely  the  example  to  my  mufe. 

And  till  my  browner  haire  be  mixt  with  gray 

Without  a  blufh,  He  tread  the  fportive  way, 

My  Mufe  dire6l ;  A  Poet  youth  may  be, 

But  age  doth  dote  without  Phifofophie. 

To  the  World. 
The  Perfection  of  Love. 

Ou  who  are  earth,  and  cannot  rife 

Above  your  fence, 
Boafling  the  envyed  wealth  which  lyes 
-Bright  in  your  Miflris  lips  or  eyes, 
Betray  a  pittyed  eloquence. 

That  which  doth  joyne  our  foules,  fo  light 

And  quicke  doth  move. 
That  like  the  Eagle  in  his  flight, 
It  doth  tranfcend  all  humane  fight. 
Loll  in  the  element  of  Love. 

You  Poets  reach  not  this,  who  fing 

The  praife  of  dufl 
Put  kneaded,  when  by  thett  you  bring 
The  rofe  and  Lilly  from  the  Spring 
T'  adome  the  wrinckled  face  of  lufl. 

When  we  fpeake  Love,  nor  art,  nor  wit 

We  gloffe  vpon : 
Our  foules  engender,  and  beget 
Idaas,  which  you  counterfeit 
In  your  dull  progagation. 


52 

While  Time,  feven  ages  fhall  difperfe, 

Wee'le  talke  of  Love, 
And  when  our  tongues  hold  no  commerfe. 
Our  thoughts  fhall  mutually  converfe. 
And  yet  the  blood  no  rebell  prove. 

And  though  we  be  of  feverall  kind 

Fit  for  offence  : 
Yet  are  we  fo  by  Love  refin'd, 
From  impure  droffe  we  are  all  mind. 
Death  could  not  more  have  conquer'd  fence. 

How  fuddenly  thofe  flames  expire 

Which  fcorch  our  clay? 
Prometheas-\\\iQ  when  we  fleale  fire 
From  heaven  'tis  endleffe  and  intire 
It  may  know  age,  but  not  decay. 


To  the  Winter. 

Hy  dofl  thou  looke  fo  pale,  decrepit  man  ? 
Why  doe  thy  cheeks  curie  like  the  Ocean, 
Into  fuch  furrowes  ?   Why  dofl  thou  appeare 
So  fhaking,  like  an  ague  to  the  yeare  ? 
The  Sunne  is  gone.    But  yet  Cajlara  flayes, 
And  will  adde  fLature  to  thy  Pigmy  daycs, 
Warme  moyflure  to  thy  veynes :  her  fmile  can  bring 
Thee  the  fweet  youth,  and  beauty  of  the  Spring. 
Hence  with  thy  palfie  then,  and  on  thy  head 
Weare  flowrie  chaplets  as  a  bridegroome  led 
To  th'  holy  Fane.     Banifh  thy  aged  ruth, 
That  Virgins  may  admire  and  court  thy  youth. 
And  the  approachmg  Sunne  when  flie  fhall  finde 
A  Spring  without  him,  fall,  fmce  ufeleffe,  blinde. 


Vpon 


a  vifit  to  C  A  s  T  A  R  A  in  the  Night. 

'Was  Night :  when  Phoebe  guided  by  thy  rayes, 
ChafLe  as  my  zeale,  with  incence  of  her  praife, 
I  humbly  crept  to  my  Cajlara's  fhrine. 
But  oh  my  fond  miftake  !  for  there  did  fliine 


53 

A  noone  of  beauty,  with  fuch  luflre  crowii'd, 
As  fhewd  'mong  th'  impious  onely  night  is  found. 
It  was  her  eyes  which  Hke  two  Diamonds  fliin'd, 
Brighten  ith'  dark.     Like  which  could  th'  Indian  find, 
But  one  among  his  rocks,  he  would  out  vie 
In  brightneffe  all  the  Diamonds  of  the  Skie. 
But  when  her  lips  did  ope,  the  Phoenix  nefl 
Breath'd  forth  her  odours;  where  might  love  once  feafl, 
Hee'd  loath  his  heauenly  furfets  :  if  we  dare 
Affirme,  love  hath  a  heaven  without  my  faire. 


To  C  A  S  T  A  R  A, 

Of  the  chaJUty  of  Ids  Love. 

^Hy  would  you  blufh  Cajlara^  when  the  name 
Of  love  you  heare  ?  Who  never  felt  his  flame, 
Ith'  fliade  of  melancholly  night  doth  flray, 
A  blind  Cymmerian  banifht  from  the  day. 
Let's  chaflly  love  Cajlara,  and  not  foyle 
This  Virgin  lampe,  by  powring  in  the  oyle 
Of  impure  thoughts.     O  let  us  fympathize, 
And  onely  talke  ith'  language  of  our  eyes, 
Like  two  flarres  in  conjun6lion.     But  beware 
Left  th'  Angels  who  of  love  compa6led  are, 
Viewing  how  chaflly  burnes  thy  zealous  fire, 
Should  fnatch  thee  hence,  to  joyne  thee  to  their  quire. 
Yet  take  thy  flight :  on  earth  for  furely  we 
So  joyn'd,  in  heaven  cannot  divided  be. 

The  Defcription  ^Castara. 

Ike  the  Violet  which  alone 

Profpers  in  fome  happy  fhade ; 

My  Cajlai'a  lives  vnknowne, 

To  no  loofer  eye  betray'd. 

For  fhee's  to  her  felfe  untrue, 
Who  delights  ith'  publicke  view. 


54 


Such  is  her  beauty,  as  no  arts 
Have  enricht  with  borrowed  grace. 
Her  high  birth  no  pride  imparts, 
For  fhe  blulhes  in  her  place. 

Folly  boafls  a  glorious  blood, 

She  is  noblefl  being  good. 

Cautious  Ihe  knew  never  yet  H 

What  a  wanton  courtlhip  meant :  || 

Not  fpeaks  loud  to  boafl  her  wit. 
In  her  filence  eloquent. 

Of  her  felfe  furvey  fhe  takes, 

But  'tweene  men  no  difference  makes. 

She  obeyes  with  fpeedy  will 
Her  grave  Parents  wife  commands. 
And  fo  innocent,  that  ill, 
She  nor  a6ls,  nor  underflands. 

Womens  feete  runne  flill  aflray. 

If  once  to  ill  they  know  the  way. 
She  failes  by  that  rocke,  the  Court, 
Where  oft  honour  fplits  her  maft : 
And  retir'dneffe  thinks  the  port, 
Where  her  fame  may  anchor  cafl. 

Vertue  fafely  cannot  fit, 

Where  vice  is  enthron'd  for  wit. 

She  holds  that  dayes  pleafure  beft, 
Where  fmne  waits  not  on  delight. 
Without  maske,  or  ball,  or  feafl, 
Sweetly  fpends  a  winters  night. 

O're  that  darkneffe,  whence  is  thrufl, 

Prayer  and  fleepe  oft  governs  lufl. 
She  her  throne  makes  reafon  climbe, 
While  wild  paffions  captive  lie. 
And  each  article  of  time. 
Her  pure  thoughts  to  heaven  flie  : 

All  her  vowes  religious  be. 

And  her  love  fhe  vowes  to  me. 

FINIS. 


CASTARA 

The     Second    part. 

Vatuniqiie  lafcivos  triumphoSy 
Calcat  A  mor,  pcdc  conjiigali. 


L O  ND ON 

Printed  for  Wi  lli  am   Cooke 
and  are  to  be  sold  at  his  Shop, 

neare  Furnivals-Inne   Gate 
in  Ho  I  borne.  1639. 


A  Wife. 


Sthefweetejlpart  in  the  harmony  of  our 
being.  To  the  love  of  which,  as  the 
channes  of  Nature  inchaiit  us,  fo  the 
laiu  of  grace  by  fpeciall priviledge  in- 
vites us.  Without  her,  Man  if  piety 
not  reflraine  him  ;  is  the  creator  of 
finne ;  or,  if  an  innated  cold  render  him,  not  onely  the 
bufineffe  of  the  prefent  age ;  the  murderer  of  pofkrity. 
She  is  fo  religious  that  ez'ery  day  croivfies  her  a  martyr, 
and  her  zcale  neither  rebellious  nor  uftcivill.  Shee  is  fo 
true  a  friend,  her  Husband  may  to  her  communicate  even 
his  ambitions,  and  if  fucceffe  Crowne  not  expe^ation, 
remai?ie  nevertheleffe  u?icontemned.  Shee  is  colleague 
unth  him  in  the  E?npire  of  profperity ;  and  afafe  retyr- 
ing  place  when  adverfity  exiles  him  from  the  World. 
She  is  fo  chafle,fhe  nez'er  underflood  the  language  lufl 
fpeakes  in,  nor  with  a  fmile  applaudes  it,  although  there 
appeare  7uit  in  the  Metaphore.  Shee  is  faire  ofiely  to 
winne  on  his  affections,  nor  would  fhe  be  Miflris  of  the 
mofl  eloquent  beauty ;  if  there  were  danger,  that  might 
per f wade  the  paffwnate  auditory,  to  the  leafl  irregular 
thought.  Shee  Is  noble  by  a  long  defcent,  but  her  memory 
is  fo  evill  a  herald,  fJiee  never  boafls  the  flory  of  her 
Anceflors.  Shee  is  fo  moderately  rich,  that  the  defeat  of 
portion  doth  neither  bring  penury  to  his  efiate,  nor  the 
fuperfluity  licence  her  to  Riot.  Shee  is  liber  all,  and  yet 
owes  not  ruine  to  vanity,  but  knowes  Charity,  to  be  the 


58 
foule  of  goodneffe,  and  Vertue  without  reward  of tejt  prone 
to  bee  her  own  deflroyer.     Shee  is  much  at  hofne,  and 
whenfhe  vifites  His  for  mutuall  commerce^  not  for  intelli- 
gence.    Shee  can  goe  to  Court,  and  retiirne  no  pafftonate 
doater  on  bravery ;  and  when  JJiee  hath  feene  the  gay 
things  mufler  up  themfelves  there,  fhe  confuiers  them  as 
Cobwebs  the  Spider  vanity  hath  fpunne.     Shee  is  fo 
generall  in  her  acquaintance,  that  JJtee  is  familiar  with 
all  whom  fame  fpeakes  vertuous ;  but  thinkes  there  can 
bee  no  friendfJiip   but  with   one;    and  therefore  hath 
neither  fhee  friend  nor  private  fervant.     Shee  fo  fquares 
her  paffion    to   her  Husbands  fortunes,   that    in  the 
Countrey  fhee  lives  without  a  froward  Melancholly,  in 
the  towne  without  a  faiitaflique  pride.     She  is  fo  temper- 
ate, fhe  never  read  the  modern  pollicie  of  glorious  fwfeits  ; 
fuice  fJie  finds  Nature  is  no  Epicure  if  art  provoke  her  not 
by  curiofitie.     Shee  is  inquifitive  onely  of  new  zvayes  to 
pleafe  him,  and  her  wit  fayles  by  no  other  compaffe  then 
that  of  his  direction.     Shee  lookes  upoit  him  as  Conjurers 
vpon  the  Circle,  beyond  which  there  is  nothiiig  but  Death 
and  Hell ;   and  in  him  fhee  beleeves  Paradice  circum- 
fcriVd.     His  vertues  are  her  wonder  and  iniitation ; 
and  his  errors,  her  credulitie  thinkes  no  fnore  frailtie, 
then  makes  him  defcend  to  the  title  of  Man.     In  a  word, 
JJieefo  lives  that  fhe  may  dye;  and  leave  no  cloude  upon 
her  Metnory,  but  have  her  character  nobly  mentioned: 
while  the  bad  Wife  is  flattered  into  infamy,  a7id  huyes 
pleafure  at  too^  deare  a  rate,  if  fhee  onely 
p ayes  for  it  Repejitance. 

1  so.     1635. 


The  Second  Part. 

To    C  A  S  T  A  R  A, 

Now  poffejl  of  her  iji  marriage. 


His  day  is  ours.     The  marriage  Angell  now 
Sees  th'  Altar  in  the  odour  of  our  vow, 
Yeeld  a  more  precious  breath,  then  that  which 
moves 

The  whifpring  leaves  in  the  Panchayan  groves. 
View  how  his  temples  fhine,  on  which  he  weares 
A  wreath  of  pearle,  made  of  thofe  precious  teares 
Thou  wepfl  a  Virgin,  when  croffe  winds  did  blow, 
Our  hopes  diflurbing  in  their  quiet  flow. 
But  now  Cajlara  fmile.  No  envious  night 
Dares  enterpofe  it  felfe,  t'ecclipfe  the  light 
Of  our  cleare  joyes.     For  even  the  lawes  divine 
Permit  our  mutuall  love^  fo  to  entwine. 
That  Kings,  to  ballance  true  content,  Ihall  fay ; 
Would  they  were  great  as  we,  we  blefl  as  they. 

To    C  A  S  T  A  R  A, 

Vpon  the  77iutuall  love  of  their  Majeflies. 


Id  you  not  fee,  CaJIara^  when  the  King 
Met  his  lov'd  Queene ;   what  fweetneffe  (he 
did  bring  [flame 

T'    incounter   his   brave    heat;   how  great   a 

From  their  brefls  meeting,  on  the  fudden  came  ? 

The  Stoike,  who  all  eafie  pafflon  flies. 

Could  he  but  heare  the  language  of  their  eyes, 

As  herefies  would  from  his  faith  remove 

The  tenets  of  his  fe6l,  and  pracSlife  love. 

The  barb'rous  nations  which  fupply  the  earth 

With  a  promifcuous  and  ignoble  birth, 

1  loves.     1634. 


6o 

Would  by  his  precedent  corre6l  their  life, 
Each  wifely  chufe,  and  chaftely  love  a  wife. 

iPrinces  example  is  a  law.     Then  we 

If  loyall  fubje6ls,  muft  true  lovers  be. 

To  Zephirus. 

jHofe  whifpersfoft  as  thofe  which  lovers  breath 
Cajlara  and  my  felfe  I  here  bequeath 
To  the  calme  wind.      For  heaven  fuch  joyes 
afford 

To  her  and  me,  that  there  can  be  no  third. 
And  you  kinde  ftarres,  be  thriftier  of  your  light : 
Her  eyes  fupply  your  office  with  more  bright 
And  conflant  luflre.     Angels  guardians,  like 
The  nimbler  Ihip  boyes  fhall  be  joy'd  to  flrike 
Or  hoilh  up  faile ;  Nor  fhall  our  veffell  move 
By  Card  or  Compaffe,  but  a  heavenly  love. 
The  courtefie  of  this  more  profperous  gale 
Shall  fwell  our  Canvas,  and  wee'le  fwiftly  faile 
To  fome  blefl  Port,  where  fhip  hath  never  lane 
At  anchor,  whofe  chafle  foule  no  foot  prophane 
Hath  ever  trod ;  Where  nature  doth  difpence 
Her  infant  wealth,  a  beautious  innocence. 
Pompe  (even  a  burthen  to  it  felfe)  nor  Pride, 
(The  Magiftrate  of  fmnes)  did  e're  abide 
On  that  fo  facred  earth.     Ambition  ne're. 
Built  for  the  fport  of  ruine,  fabrickes  there. 
Thence  age  and  death  are  exil'd,  all  offence 
And  feare  expell'd,  all  noyfe  and  faaion  thence. 
A  filence  there  fo  melancholly  fweet, 
That  none  but  whifpring  Turtles  ever  meet. 
Thus  Paradife  did  our  firft  Parents  wooe. 
To  harmeleffe  fweets,  at  firft  poffeft  by  two. 
And  o're  this  fecond,  wee'le  ufurpe  the  throne  ; 
Cajiara,  wee'le  obey  and  rule  alone. 
For  the  rich  vertue  of  this  foyle  I  feare. 
Would  be  depraved,  ftiould  but  a  third  be  there. 

1  Princes  examples  are  a  law.     Then  we.     1634. 


6i 
To    C  A  S  T  A  R  A 

in  a  Trance. 

|Orfake  me  not  fo  foone.      Cajlara  flay, 
And  as  I  breake  the  prifon  of  my  clay, 
le  fill  the  Canvas  with  m'expiring  breath, 
'And  with  thee  faile  o're   the  vafl  maine    of 
Some  Cherubin  thus  as  we  paffe  fliall  play.         [death. 
Goe  happy  twins  of  love  ;  The  courteous  Sea 
Shall  fmooth  her  wrinkled  brow  :  the  winds  fhal  fleep, 
Or  onely  whifper  muficke  to  the  deepe. 
Every  ungentle  rocke  fliall  melt  away, 
The  Syrens  fing  to  pleafe,  not  to  betray. 
Th'  indulgent  skie  fhall  fmile :  each  flarry  quire 
Contend,  which  fliall  afford  the  brighter  fire. 

While  Love  the  Pilot,  fleeres  his  courfe  fo  even, 
Ne're  to  cafl.  anchor  till  we  reach  at  Heaven. 

To    Death. 

C  A  s  T  A  R  A  being  ficke. 


^Ence  prophane  grim  man,  nor  dare 
iC/i  ili^^  approach  fo  neere  my  faire. 
l,B3.Ej  Marble  vaults,  and  gloomy  caves, 

'Church-yards,  Charnell  houfes,  graves, 
Where  the  living  loath  to  be, 
Heaven  hath  defign'd  to  thee. 

But  it  needs  'mongfl  us  thou'lt  rage, 
Let  thy  fury  feed  on  age. 
Wrinckled  browes,  and  withered  thighs, 
May  fupply  thy  facrifice. 
Yet  perhaps  as  thou  flew'fl  by, 
A  flamed  dart  fliot  from  her  eye, 
Sing'd  thy  wings  with  wanton  fire. 
Whence  th'  art  forc't  to  hover  nigh  her. 
If  Love  fo  miflooke  his  aime. 


62 

Gently  welcome  in  the  flame  : 
They  who  loath'd  thee,  when  they  fee 
Where  thou  harbor'fl,  will  love  thee. 
Onely  I,  fuch  is  my  fate, 
Mufl  thee  as  a  rivall  hate, 
Court  her  gently,  learne  to  prove, 
Nimble  in  the  thefts  of  love. 
Gaze  on  th'  errors  of  her  haire  : 
Touch  her  hp ;  but  oh  beware, 
Left  too  ravenous  of  thy  bliffe, 
Thou  fhouldfl  murder  with  a  kiffe. 


To    C  A  S  T  A  R  A. 

Inviting  her  to  Jleepe. 

Leepe  my  Cajiara,  filence  doth  invite 
Thy  eyes  to  clofe  up  day;  though  envious  night 
Grieves  Fate  fhould  her  the  figh  t  of  th  em  debarre, 
'For  fne  is  exil'd,  while  they  open  are. 
R  eft  in  thy  peace  fecure.     With  drowfie  charmes, 
Kinde  fleepe  bewitcheth  thee  into  her  armes  ; 
And  finding  where  Loves  chiefeft  treafure  lies, 
Is  hke  a  theefe  ftole  under  thy  bright  eyes. 
Thy  innocence  rich  as  the  gaudy  quilt 
Wrought  by  the  Perfian  hand,  thy  dreames  from  guilt 
Exempted,  heaven  with  fweete  repofe  doth  crowne 
Each  vertue,  fofter  then  the  Swans  fam'd  downe. 
As  exorcifts  wild  fpirits  mildly  lay, 
May  fleepe  thy  fever  calmely  chafe  away. 

IJpon  Castara's  recoverie. 

He  is  reftor'd  to  life.     Vn thrifty  Death, 
Thy  mercie  in  permitting  vitall  breath 
Backe  to  Cajlara,  hath  enlarg'd  us  all, 
Whome  griefe  had  martyr'd  in  her  funerall. 
Wn-iile  others  in  the  ocean  of  their  teares, 


63 

Had  finking,  wounded  the  beholders  eares, 
With  exclamations  :  I  without  a  grone, 
Had  fuddenly  congeal'd  into  a  (lone  : 
There  Rood  a  flatue,  till  the  generall  doomc  ; 
Had  ruin'd  time  and  memory  with  her  tombe. 
While  in  my  heart,  which  marble,  yet  Hill  bled, 
Each  Lover  might  this  Epitaph  have  read. 

"  Her  earth  lyes  here  below ;  her  foul's  above, 
"  This  wonder  fpeakes  her  vertue,  and  my  love." 


To  a  Friaid, 
Iiivitiiig  him  to  a  meeting  upon  promife. 

Ay  you  drinke  beare,  or  that  adult'rate  wine 
Which  makes  the  zeale  of  A7?i/ierdaf?i  divine ; 
you  make  breach  of  promife.     I  have  now 
'So  rich  a  Sacke,  that  even  your  felfe  will  bow 
T'  adore  my  Genius.     Of  this  wine  fhould  Prynne 
Drinke  but  a  plenteous  glaffe,  he  would  beginne 
A  health  to  Shakefpeares  ghofl,  But  you  may  bring 
Some  excufe  forth,  and  anfwer  me,  the  King 
To  day  will  give  you  audience,  or  that  on 
Affaires  of  flate,  you  and  fome  ferious  Don 
Are  to  refolve ;  or  elfe  perhaps  you'le  fm 
So  farre,  as  to  leave  word  y'ar  not  within. 

The  lead  of  thefe,  will  make  me  only  thinke 
Him  fubtle,  who  can  in  his  clofet  drinke 
Drunke  even  alone,  and  thus  made  wife  create 
As  dangerous  plots  as  the  Low  Countrey  flate, 
Proje6ling  for  fuch  baits,  as  fliall  draw  ore 
To  Holland,  all  the  herrings  from  our  fhore. 

But  y'are  too  full  of  candour :  and  I  know 
Will  fooner  (lones  at  Sals' burg  cafements  throw, 
Or  buy  up  for  the  filenc'd  Levits,  all 
The  rich  impropriations,  then  let  pall 
So  pure  Canary,  and  breake  fuch  an  oath  : 
Since  charity  is  fmn'd  againfl  in  both. 


64 

Come  therefore  blefl  even  in  the  Lollards  zeale, 
Who  canfl  with  confcience  fafe,  'fore  hen  and  veale 
Say  grace  in  Latine ;  while  I  faintly  fing 
A  Penitential  verfe  in  oyle  and  Ling. 
Come  then,  and  bring  with  you  prepar'd  for  fight, 
Vnmixt  Canary,  Heaven  fend  both  prove  right ! 
This  I  am  fiire :  My  facke  will  difingage 
All  humane  thoughts,  infpire  fo  high  a  rage, 
That  Hypocrene  Ihall  henceforth  Poets  lacke. 
Since  more  Enthufiafmes  are  in  my  facke. 

Heightned  with  which,  my  raptures  Ihall  commend, 
How  good  Cajlara  is,  how  deare  my  friend. 

To   C  A  S  T  A  R  A. 

Where  true  happineffe  abides. 

AJlara  whifper  in  fome  deads  mans  eare, 
This  fubtill  qucere-,  and  hee'le  point  out  where. 
By  anfwers  negatiue,  true  joyes  abide. 
Hee'le  fay  they  flow  not  on  th'  uncertaine  tide 
Of  greatneffe,  they  can  no  firme  bafis  have, 
Vpon  the  trepidation  of  a  wave. 
Nor  lurke  they  in  the  caverns  of  the  earth, 
Whence  all  the  wealthy  minerals  draw  their  birth, 
To  covetous  man  fo  fatall.     Nor  ith'  grace 
Love  they  to  wanton  of  a  brighter  face, 
For  th'are  above  Times  battery ;  and  the  light 
Of  beauty,  ages  cloud  will  foone  be  night. 
If  among  thefe  Content,  he  thus  doth  prove, 
Hath  no  abode ;  where  dwels  it  but  in  Love  ? 

To   C  A  S  T  A  R  A. 

Orfake  with  me  the  earth,  my  faire, 
And  travell  nimbly  through  the  aire. 
Till  we  have  reacht  th'  admiring  skies; 
Then  lend  fight  to  thofe  heavenly  eyes 

Which  blind  themfclves,  make  creatures  fee. 

And  taking  view  of  all,  when  we 


Shall  finde  a  pure  and  glorious  fpheare ; 
Wee'le  fix  like  Rarres  for  ever  there. 
Nor  will  we  flill  each  other  view, 
Wee'le  gaze  on  lefTer  flarres  then  you  ; 
See  how  by  their  weake  influence  they, 
The  Rrongeft  of  mens  adlions  fway. 
In  an  inferiour  orbe  below, 
A\'ec'le  fee  Cali/to  loofely  throw 
Her  haire  abroad  :  as  flie  did  weare, 
The  felf-lLime  beauty  in  a  Beare, 
As  when  Hie  a  cold  Virgin  flood. 
And  yet  inflam'd  loves  luflfull  blood. 
Then  looke  on  Lede,  whofe  faire  beames 
By  their  refledlion  guild  thofe  flreames, 
Where  firfl.  unhappy  fhe  began 
To  play  the  wanton  with  a  Swan. 
If  each  of  thefe  loofe  beauties  are 
Transform'd  to  a  more  beauteous  flarre 
By  the  adult'rous  lufl  of  love ; 
Why  fhould  not  we,  by  purer  love  ? 

To    C  A  S  T  A  R  A, 

Vpon  the  death  of  a  Lady. 

hlfuira  vv-eepe  not,  though  her  tombe  appeare, 
Sometime  thy  griefe  to  anfwer  with  a  teare  : 
The  marble  will  but  wanton  with  thy  woe. 
Death  is  the  Sea,  and  we  like  Rivers  flow 
To  lofe  our  felves  in  the  infatiate  Maine, 
Whence  Rivers  may,  fhe^  ne're  returne  againe. 
Nor  grieve  this  Chriflall  flreame  fo  foone  did  fall 
Into  the  Ocean  ;  fince  fhe  perfum'd  all 
The  banks  flie  pafl.,  fo  that  each  neighbour  field 
Did  fweete  flowers  cherifh  by  her  watring,  yeeld. 
Which  now  adorne  her  Hearfe.     The  violet  there 
On  her  pale  cheeke  doth  the  fad  livery  weare, 
Which  heavens  compaffion  gave  her ;  And  fince  (he 
Caufe  cloath'd  in  purple  can  no  mourner  be. 
As  incenfe  to  the  tombe  fhe  gives  her  breath, 

1  we.     1634. 
E 


66 

And  fading,  on  her  Lady  waits  in  death. 

Such  office  the  Egyptian  handmaids  did 

Great  Cleopatra,  when  Ihe  dying  chid 

The  Afps  flow  venome,  trembling  flie  (hould  be 

By  Fate  rob'd  even  of  that  blacke  vi^ory. 

The  flowers  inflrucSl  our  forrowes.     Come  then  all 

Ye  beauties,  to  true  beauties  funerall, 

And  with  her,  to  increafe  deaths  pompe,  decay. 

Since  the  fupporUng  fabricke  of  your  clay 

Is  falne,  how  can  ye  ftand?     How  can  the  night 

Shew  fl.ars,  when  Fate  puts  out  the  dayes  great  light  ? 

But  'mong  the  faire,  if  there  live  any  yet, 

She's  but  the  fairer  Di^^hies  counterfeit. 

Come  you  who  fpeake  your  titles.     Reade  in  this 

Pale  booke,  how  vaine  a  boafl  your  greatneffe  is. 

What's  honour  but  a  hatchment?  what  is  here 

Of  Percy  left,  and  Stanly,  names  mofl  deare 

To  vertue?  but  a  crefcent  turn'd  to  th'  wane, 

An  Eagle  groaning  o're  an  infant  flaine? 

Or  what  availes  her,  that  flie  once  was  led, 

A  glorious  bride  to  valiant  Digbies  bed. 

Since  death  hath  them  divorc'd?     If  then  alive 

There  are,  who  thefe  fad  obfequies  furvive 

And  vaunt  a  proud  defcent,  they  onely  be 

Loud  heralds  to  fet  forth  her  pedigree. 

Come  all  who  glory  in  your  wealth,  and  view 

The  embleme  of  your  frailty.     How  untrue 

(Though  flattering  like  friends)  your  treafures  are, 

Her  Fate  hath  taught^ :  who,  when  what  ever  rare 

The  either  Indies  boafl,  lay  richly  fpread 

For  her  to  weare,  lay  on  her  piflow  dead. 

Come  likewife  my  Cajlara  and  behold. 

What  blefflngs  ancient  prophefle  foretold, 

Beflow'd  on  her  in  death.     She  pafl  away 

So  fvveetely  from  the  world,  as  if  her  clay 

Laid  onely  downe  to  flumber.     Then  forbeare 

To  let  on  her  blefl  aflies  fall  a  teare. 

But  if  th'  art  too  much  woman,  foftly  w^eepe, 

Lefl  griefe  diflurbe  the  fllence  of  her  fleepe. 

1  Hei  Fate  hath  taught  you  :  wlio,  when  what  ever  rare,     1634,  1635. 


67 


To    C  A  S  T  A  R  A, 

Being  to  take  a  joicrney, 

^Hat's  death  more  than  departure;  the  dead  go 
Like  travelling  exiles,  compell'd  to  know 


Thofe  regions  they  heard  mention  of:  Tis  th'  art 
Of  forrowes,  fayes,  who  dye  doe  but  depart. 
Then  weepe  thy  funerall  teares  :  which  heaven  t'adorne 
The  beauteous  treffes  of  the  weeping  morne, 
Will  rob  me  of:  and  thus  my  tombe  fhall  be 
As  naked,  as  it  had  no  obfequie. 
Know  in  thefe  lines,  fad  muficke  to  thy  eare, 
My  fad  CaJJara,  you  the  fermon  here 
Which  I  preach  o're  my  hearfe  :  And  dead,  I  tell   ' 
My  owne  lives  flory,  ring  but  my  owne  knell. 
But  when  I  fhall  returne,  know  'tis  thy  breath 
In  fighes  divided,  refcues  me  from  death. 

To    C  A  S  T  A  R  A, 

Weeping. 


\Af!ara  \  O  you  are  too  prodigal! 
0th'  treafure  of  your  teares  ;  which  thus  let  fall 
[Make  no  returne :  well  plac'dcalme  peace  might 
bring 

To  the  loud  wars,  each  free  a  captiv'd  King. 
So  the  unskilfuU  Indian  thofe  bright  jems, 
Which  might  adde  majeflie  to  Diadems, 
'Mong  the  waves  fcatters,  as  if  he  would  flora 
The  thankleffe  Sea,  to  make  our  Empire  poore. 
When  heaven  darts  thunder  at  the  wombe  of  Time, 
Caufe  with  each  moment  it  brings  forth  a  crime, 
Or  elfe  defpairing  to  roote  out  abufe. 
Would  mine  vitious  earth  ;  be  then  profufe. 
Light,  chas'd  rude  chaos  from  the  world  before. 
Thy  teares,  by  hindring  it's  returne,  worke  more. 


68 
To  C  A  S  T  A  R  A. 


Vpt 


i> 


p^j] Heard  a  figh,  and  fomething  in  my  eare 

Did  whifper,  what  my  foule  before  did  feare. 
That  it  was  breath'd  by  thee.    May  th'eafie  Spring 
'Enricht  with  odours,  wanton  on  the  wing 
Of  th'  Eaflerne  wind,  may  ne're  his  beauty  fade, 
If  he  the  treafure  of  this  breath  convey'd ; 
'Twas  thine  by  'th  muficke  which  th'  harmonious  breath 
Of  Swans  is  hke,  propheticke  in  their  death : 
And  th'odour,  for  as  it  the  nard  expires, 
Perfuming  Phoenix-hke  his  funerall  fires. 
The  winds  of  Paradice  fend  fuch  a  gale. 
To  make  the  Lovers  veffels  calmely  faile 
To  his  lov'd  Port.     This  fhall,  where  it  infpires, 
Increafe  the  chafte,  extinguifh  unchafte  fires. 


To  the  Right  Ho7iourable  the  Lady  F. 

Madam. 

Ou  faw  our  loves,and  prais'd  the  mutuall  flame*. 
In  which  as  incenfe  to  your  facred  name 
Burnes  a  reHgious  zeale.     May  we  be  lofL 
To  one  another,  and  our  fire  be  frofl ; 
When  we  omit  to  pay  the  tribute  due 
To  worth  and  vertue,  and  in  them  to  you : 
Who  are  the  foule  of  women.     Others  be 
But  beauteous  parts  oth'  female  body ;  fhe 
Who  boafls  how  many  nimble  Cupids  skip 
Through  her  bright  face,  is  but  an  eye  or  lip : 
The  other  who  in  her  foft  brefls  can  fliow 
Warme  Violets  growing  in  a  banke  of  fnow, 
And  vaunts  the  lovely  wonder,  is  but  skin  : 
Nor  is  (he  but  a  hand,  who  holds  within 


69 

The  chryllall  yioll  of  her  wealthy  palme, 
The  precious  fwcating  of  the  Eaflerne  balmc. 
And  all  thefe  if  you  them  together  take, 
And  joyne  with  art,  will  but  one  body  make, 
To  which  the  fouie  each  vitall  motion  gives ; 
You  are  infus'd  into  it,  and  it  lives. 
But  fliould  you  up  to  your  blefl  manfion  flie, 
How  loath'd  an  object  would  the  carkaffe  lie? 
You  are  all  mind.     Cajlara  when  flie  lookes, 
On  you  th'  Epitome  of  all,  that  bookes 
Or  e're  tradition  taught ;  who  gives  fuch  praife 
Vnto  your  fex,  that  now  even  cuflomes  fayes 
He  hath  a  female  foule,  who  ere  hath  writ 
Volumes  which  learning  comprehend,  and  wit. 
Caflara  cries  to  me ;  Search  out  and  find 
The  Mines  of  wifedome  in  her  learned  mind, 
And  trace  her  fleps  to  honour ;  I  afpire 
Enough  to  worth,  while  I  her  worth  admire. 

To    C  A  S  T  A  R  A, 

Againjl  opinion. 

Hy  fliould  we  build,  Cajlara^  in  the  aire 
Of  fraile  opinion  ?     Why  admire  as  faire. 
What  the  weake  faith  of  man  gives  us  for  right? 
The  jugling  world  cheats  but  the  weaker  fight. 
^Vhat  is  in  greatneffe  happy  ?     As  free  mirth. 
As  ample  pleafures  of  th'  indulgent  earth 
We  joy,  who  on  the  ground  our  manfion  finde. 
As  they,  who  faile  like  witches  in  the  wind 
Of  Court  applaufe.     What  can  their  powerfull  fpell 
Over  inchanted  man,  more  than  compell 
Him  into  various  formes  ?     Nor  ferves  their  charme 
Themfelves  to  good,  but  to  worke  others  harme. 
Tyrant  Opinion  but  depofe.     And  we 
Will  abfolute  ith'  happiefl  Empire  be. 


70 


To    C  A  S  T  A  R  A. 

Vpon  beatitie. 

AJIara,  fee  that  duft,  the  fportlve  wind 
So  wantons  with.    'Tis  happ'ly  all  you'le  finde 
Left  of  fome  beauty :  and  how  flill  it  flies, 
To  trouble,  as  it  did  in  life,  our  eyes. 
O  empty  boafl  of  flefh  ?     Though  our  heires  gild 
The  farre  fetch  Phrigian  marble,  which  fhall  build 
A  burthen  to  our  afhes,  yet  will  death 
Betray  them  to  the  fport  of  every  breath. 
Dofl  thou,  poor  relique  of  our  frailty,  flill 
Swell  up  with  glory?     Or  is  it  thy  skill, 
To  mocke  weake  man,  whom  every  wind  of  praife 
Into  the  aire,  doth  'bove  his  center  raife. 
If  fo,  mocke  on.  And  tell  him  that  his  lufl 
To  beauty's,  madnefle.     For  it  courts  but  dud. 


To    C  A  S  T  A  R  A, 

Melancholly. 

Ere  but  that  figh  a  penitentiall  breath 
That  thou  art  mine :  It  would  blowwith  itdeath, 
T'  inclofe  me  in  my  marble :  Where  I'de  be 
Slave  to  the  tyrant  wormes,  to  fet  thee  free. 
What  fhould  we  envy?     Though  with  larger  faile 
Some  dance  upon  the  Ocean  :  yet  more  fraile 
And  faithleffe  is  that  wave,  than  where  we  glide, 
Blefl  in  the  fafety  of  a  private  tide. 
We  flill  have  land  in  ken.     And  'caufe  our  boat 
Dares  not  affront  the  weather,  wee'le  ne're  float 
Farre  from  the  fhore.     To  daring  them  each  cloud 
Is  big  with  thunder,  every  wind  fpeakes  loud. 
And  though  wild  rockes  about  the  fhore  appeare 
Yet  vertue  will  fjnde  roome  to  anchor  there. 


71 


A  Dialoo^ne  bctwecne 

Jl  r  a p  h i U  and  Cit s t a r ift. 

^^^P'3*  If^V^JJ^JI^y?''?'^^,  you  too  fondly  court 

The  lilken  peace   with   which    we 
cover'd  are, 
Vnquiet  time  may  for  his  fport, 
Vp  from  its  iron  den  rowfe  fleepy  warre. 

Cd^t.     Then  in  the  language  of  the  drum, 

I  will  inflrudl  my  yet  affrighted  eare, 
All  women  fhall  in  me  be  dumbe ; 
If  I  but  with  my  Araphill  be  there  ? 

Jlrapl).  If  Fate  like  an  unfaithfuU  gale, 

Which  having  vow'd  to  th'fliip  a  faire  event, 
0th'  fudden  rends  her  hopefuU  faile ; 
Blow  ruine  j  will  CaJIara  then  repent  ? 

dajJt.     Love  fliall  in  that  tempefluous  fhowre   [fhow  : 
Her  brighteflbloffomelike  theblacke-thorne 
VVeake  friendfhip  profpers  by  the  powre 
Of  fortunes  Sunne.     I'le  in  her  winter  grow. 

^rapl).   If  on  my  skin  the  noyfome  skar 

I  fhould  oth'leprofie,  or  canker  weare  ; 
Or  if  the  fulph'rous  breath  of  warre       [feare  ? 
Should  blafl  my  youth  ;  Should  I  not  be  thy 

CasJt.     In  flefh  may  fickneffe  horror  move, 

But  heavenly  zeale  will  be  by  it  refin'd, 
For  then  wee'd  like  two  Angels  love,    [mind. 
Without   a   fenfe ;    imbrace^  each   others 

Jlrapl).  Were  it  not  impious  to  repine ; 

'Gainfl  rigid  Fate  I  fliould  diredl  my  breath. 
That  two  muil  be,  whom  heaven  did  joyne 
In  fuch  a  happy  one,  disjoyn'd  by  death. 

1  Without  a  sense;  and  clip  each  others  mind.     1634,  1635. 


72 

^a^t.     That's  no  divource.     Then  fhall  we  fee  [Hate, 
The  rites  in  Hfe,  were  types  o'th  marriage 
Our  foules  on  earth  contra6led  be ; 

But  they  in  heaven  their  nuptials  confumate. 

^ To  the  Right  HonoMvable  Henry  Lord  M. 

My  Lord. 

Y  thoughts  are  not  fo  rugged,  nor  doth  earth 
So  farre  predominate  in  me,  that  mirth 
Lookes  not  as  lovely  as  when  our  delight 
Firfl  fafhion'd  wings  to  adde  a  nimbler  flight 
To  lazie  time ;  who  would,  to  have  furvai'd 
Our  varied  pleafures,  there  have  ever  ftaid. 
And  they  were  harmeleffe.     For  obedience 
If  frailty  yeelds  to  the  wild  lawes  of  fence ; 
We  fhall  but  with  a  fugred  venome  meete ; 
No  pleafure,  if  not  innocent  as  fweet. 
And  that's  your  choyce :  who  adde  the  title  good 
To  that  of  noble.     For  although  the  blood 
Of  MarJJiall^  Stanley^  and  ^La  Pole  doth  flow 
With  happy  Brandon^ s  in  your  veines ;  you  owe 
Your  vertue  not  to  them.     Man  builds  alone 
0th'  ground  of  honour :  For  defert's  our  ovvne. 
Be  that  your  ayme.     I'le  with  Cajlara  fit 
Ith'  fliade,  from  heat  of  bufmeffe.     While  my  wit 
Is  neither  big  with  an  ambitious  ayme, 
To  build  tall  Pyramids  Ith'  court  of  fame, 
For  after  ages,  or  to  win  conceit 
0th'  prefent,  and  grow  in  opinion  great. 
Rich  in  our  felves,  we  envy  not  the  Fail, 
Her  rockes  of  Diamonds,  or  her  gold  the  Well. 
Arabia  may  be  happy  in  the  death 
Of  her  reviving  Phoenix ;  In  the  breath 
Of  coole  Favo7iiiis,  famous  be  the  grove 
Of  Tempe ;  while  we  in  each  others  love. 
For  that  let  us  be  fam'd.     And  when  of  all 
That  Nature  made  us  two,  the  funerall 

1  To  the  Right  Honourable,  vty  very  good  Lord  Henry  Lord  M. 


I  J 


73 

Leaves  but  a  little  dufl ;  (which  then  as  wed, 
Even  after  death,  fliall  fleepe  flill  in  one  bed.) 
The  Bride  and  Bridegroome  on  the  folemne  day, 
Shall  with  warm  zeale  approach  our  Vrne,  to  pay 
Their  vowes,  that  heaven  Hiouldbleffefo  farre  their  rites, 
To  fliew  them  the  faire  paths  to  our  delights. 

To  a  Tombe. 

|Yrant  o're  tyrants,  thou  who  onely  dofl 
Clip  the  lafcivious  beauty  without  luR;  [fence; 
What  horror  at  thy  fight  fhootes  through  each 
How  powerfuU  is  thy  filent  eloquence, 
Which  never  flatters  ?     Thou  inflru6l'fl  the  proud, 
That  their  fwolne  pompe  is  but  an  empty  cloud, 
Slave  to  each  wind.    The  faire,  thofe  flowers  they  have 
Frefh  in  their  cheeke,  are  flrevvd  upon  a  grave. 
Thou  tell'fl  the  rich,  their  Idoll  is  but  earth. 
The  vainely  pleas'd,  that  Syren-like  their  mirth 
Betrayes  to  mifchiefe,  and  that  onely  he 
Dares  welcome  death,  whofe  aim.es  at  vertue  be. 
Which  yet  more  zeale  doth  to  CaJIara  move. 
What  checks  me,  when  the  tombe  perfwades  to  love? 

To    C  A  S  T  A  R  A. 

Vpo7i  tJiought  of  Age  and  Death. 

He  breath  of  time  fhall  blaft  the  flowry  Spring, 
Which  fo  perfumes  thy  cheeke,  and  with  it  bring 
So  darke  a  mifl,,  as  fliall  eclipfe  the  light 
Of  thy  faire  eyes,  in  an  eternall  night. 
Some  melanchoUy  chamber  of  the  earth, 
i(For  that  like  Time  devourcs  whom  it  gave  breath) 
Thy  beauties  fliall  entombe,  while  all  who  ere 
Lov'd  nobly,  offer  up  their  forrowes  there. 
But  I  whofe  griefe  no  formall  limits  bound, 
I'eholding  the  darke  caverne  of  that  ground. 
Will  there  immure  my  felfe.     And  thus  I  fliall 

1  (For  she  like  Time  devoures  whom  she  gave  breath) 


74 

Thy  mourner  be,  and  my  ovvne  funerall. 
Elfe  by  the  weeping  magicke  of  my  verfe, 
Thou  hadll  reviv'd,  to  triumph  o'rc  thy  hearfe. 

^To  the  Right  Honourable,  the  Lord  P. 

My  Lord. 

He  reverend  man  by  magicke  of  his  prayer 
Hath  charm'd  fo,  that  I  and  your  daughter  are 
Contra6ted  into  one.     The  holy  Hghts 
Smil'd  with  a  cheerful!  luflre  on  our  rites, 
And  every  thing  prefag'd  full  happineffe 
To  mutuall  love ;  if  you'le  the  omen  bleffe. 
Nor  grieve,  my  Lord,  'tis  perfe6led.     Before 
Afflidied  Seas  fought  refuge  on  the  fhore 
From  the  angry  Northwind.     Ere  th'aflonifht  Spring 
Heard  in  the  ayre  the  feather'd  people  fmg, 
Ere  time  had  motion,  or  the  Sunne  obtain'd 
His  province  o're  the  day,  this  was  ordain'd. 
Nor  thinke  in  her  I  courted  wealth  or  blood. 
Or  more  uncertaine  hopes  :  for  had  I  flood 
On  th'  higheft  ground  of  fortune,  the  world  knownc 
No  greatneffe  but  what  waited  on  my  throne ; 
And  fhe  had  onely  had  that  face  and  mind, 
I,  with  my  felfe,  had  th'earth  to  her  refign'd. 
In  vertue  there's  an  Empire.     And  fo  fvveete 
The  rule  is  when  it  doth  with  beauty  meete, 
As  fellow  Confull ;  that  of  heaven  they 
Nor  earth  partake ;  who  would  her  difobey. 
This  captiv'd  me.     And  ere  I  queflion'd  why 
I  ought  to  love  Cajiara,  through  my  eye. 
This  foft  obedience  ftole  into  my  heart. 
Then  found  I  love  might  lend  to  th'quick-ey'd  art 
Of  Reafon  yet  a  purer  fight :  For  he 
Though  blind,  taught  her  thefe  Indies  firfl  to  fee. 
In  whofe  poffeffion  I  at  length  am  blefl, 
And  with  my  felfe  at  quiet,  here  I  refl. 
As  all  things  to  my  powre  fubdu'd.     To  me 
Ther's  nought  beyond  this.     The  whole  world  is  flie. 

1  To  the  Risht  Honorable,  inv  very  good  Lord,  the  Lord  P.     1634,  1635. 


75 


His  Miijc  fpcakes  to  Jmn. 

jHy  vowes  are  heard,  and  thy  Cajlaras  name 
Is  writ  as  fliire  ith'  Regifler  of  Fame, 
As  th'  ancient  beauties  which  tranllated  are 
By  Poets  vp  to  heaven ;  each  there  a  flarre. 
And  though  Imperiall  Tiber  boafl  alone 
Ovids  Coriniia,  and  to  Ai'fi  is  knowne 
But  Petrarchs  Laura  ;  while  our  famous  Thames 
Doth  murmur  Sydncvcs  Sidla  to  her  flreames. 
Yet  hall  tiiou  Sci'crjic  left,  and  flie  can  bring 
As  many  quires  of  Swans,  as  they  to  fmg 
Thy  glorious  love  :  Which  living  fliall  by  thee 
The  onely  Sov'raigne  of  thofe  waters  be. 

Dead  in  loves  firmament,  no  flarre  fhall  fhine 
So  nobly  faire,  so  purely  chafle  as  thine. 


To  Vaine  hope. 

Hou  dreame  of  madmen,  ever  changing  gale, 
5  Swell  with  thy  wanton  breath  the  gaudy  faile 

Of  glorious  fooles.    Thou  guid'fL  them  who  thee 
court 

To  rocks,  to  quick-fands,  or  fome  faithleffe  port. 
Were  I  not  mad,  who  when  fecure  at  eafe, 
I  might  ith'  Cabbin  paffe  the  raging  Seas, 
Would  like  a  franticke  fhipboy  wildly  hafle. 
To  climbe  the  giddy  top  of  th'unfafe  mafl  ? 
Ambition  never  to  her  hopes  did  faine 
A  greatneffe,  but  I  really  obtaine 
In  my  Cajlara.     Wer't  not  fondneffe  then 
T'  embrace^  the  fliadowes  of  true  bliffe  ?  And  when 
My  Paradife  all  flowers  and  fruits  both  breed  : 
To  rob  a  barren  garden  for  a  weed  ? 

1  clip.     i6j4,  1635. 


76 


To      C  A  S  T  A  R  A, 

How  happy ^  though  in  an  obf cure  fortune. 

lEre  we  by  fate  throwne  downe  below  our  feare ; 
Could  we  be  poore  ?   Or  queflion  Natures  care 
In  our  provifion  ?  She  who  doth  afford 
A  feather'd  garment  fit  for  every  bird, 
And  onely  voyce  enough  t'expreffe  delight. 
She  who  apparels  Lillies  in  their  white, 
As  if  in  that  fhe'de  teach  mans  duller  fence, 
Wh'are  highefl,  fhould  be  fo  in  innocence. 
She  who  in  damaske  doth  attire  the  Rofe, 
(And  man  t'himfelfe  a  mockery  to  propofe, 
'Mong  whom  the  humbleft  Judges  grow  to  fit) 
She  who  in  purple  cloathes  the  Violet : 

If  thus  fhe  cares  for  things  even  voyd  of  fence ; 
Shall  we  fufpe6t  in  us  her  providence  ? 


To     C  A  S  T  A  R  A. 

Hat  can  the  freedome  of  our  love  enthrall  ? 
Cafiara  were  we  difpoffefl  of  all 
The  gifts  of  fortune  ;  richer  yet  than  fhe 
Can  make  her  flaves,  wee'd  in  each  other  be. 
Love  in  himfelfe's  a  world.     If  we  fhould  have 
A  manfion  but  in  fome  forfaken  cave ; 
Wee'd  fmooth  misfortune  :  and  our  felvesthinke  then 
Retir'd  like  Princes  from  the  noife  of  men, 
To  breath  a  while  unflatter'd.     Each  wild  beafl, 
That  fhould  the  filence  of  our  cell  infeft, 
With  clamor,  feeking  prey ;  Wee'd  fancie  were 
Nought  but  an  avaritious  Courtier. 

VVealth's  but  opinion.     Who  thinks  others  more 
Of  treafures  have,  than  we,  is^  onely  poore. 

1  he's.     1634. 


77 


071  the  death  of  the  Right  Hojioiirable^ 
G  E  OR  G  E  Earle  of  S. 


^  Right  Saint,  thy  pardon,  if  my  fadder  verfe, 
Appeare  in  fighing  o're  thy  glorious  hearfe, 
I'o  envie  heaven.     For  fame  it  felfe  now  vveares 
Griefes  Liver}',  and  onely  fpeaks  in  teares. 
And  pardon  you  CaJJara^  if  a  while 
Your  memory  I  banifh  from  my  Rile ; 
When  I  have  payd  his  death  the  tribute  due, 
Of  forrow,  I'le  returne  to  Love  and  you. 
Is  there  a  name  like  Talbot^  which  a  fliowre 
Can  force  from  every  eye  ?  And  hath  even  powre 
To  alter  natures  courfe  ?  How  elfe  fhould  all 
Runne  wilde  with  mourning,  and  diftracfted  fall : 
Th'  illiterate  vulgar  in  a  well  tun'd  breath, 
Lament  their  loffe,  and  learnedly  chide  death. 
For  itsi  bold  rape,  while  the  fad  Poets  fong 
Is  yet  unheard,  as  if  griefe  had  no  tongue. 
Th'amaz'd  marriner  having  lofl  his  way 
In  the  tempefluous  defart  of  the  Sea, 
Lookes  vp  but  findes  no  flarres.     They  all  confpire 
To  darke  themfelves,  t'enlighten  this  new  fire. 
The  leam'd  Aflronomer  v/ith  daring  eye, 
Searching  to  tracke  the  Spheres  through  which  you  flie, 
(Mod  beauteous  foule)  doth  in  his  journey  faile. 
And  blufhing,  fayes,  the  fubtlefl.  art  is  fraile. 
And  but  truths  counterfet.     Your  flight  doth  teach, 
Faire  Vertue  hath  an  Orbe  beyond  his  reach. 

But  I  grow  dull  with  forrow.     Vnkinde  Fate 
To  play  the  tyrant  and  fubvert  the  flate 
Of  fetled  goodneffe.     Who  fhall  henceforth  fland 
A  pure  example  to  enforme  the  Land 
Of  her  loofe  riot^  ?  Who  fhall  counter-checke 
The  wanton  pride  of  greatneffe  ;  and  direct 
Straid  honour  in  the  true  magnificke  way? 

1  his.     1634,  1635.  2  wit.     1634. 


78 

Whofe  life  fhall  fhew  what  triumph  'tis  t'obey 

The  hard  commands  of  reafon  ?  And  how  fweet 

The  nuptials  are,  when  wealth  and  learning  meet  ? 

Who  will  with  filent  piety  confute 

Atheiflicke  Sophiflry,  and  by  the  fruite 

Approve  Religions  tree  ?  Who'le  teach  his  blood 

A  Virgin  law  and  dare  be  great  and  good  ? 

Who  will  defpife  his  fliles  ?  And  nobly  weigh 

In  judgements  ballance,  that  his  honour'd  clay 

Hath  no  advantage  by  them  ?  Who  will  live 

So  innocently  pious,  as  to  give 

The  world  no  fcandall  ?  Who'le  himfelf  deny, 

And  to  warme  paffion  a  cold  martyr  dye  ? 

My  griefe  diflracSls  me.     If  my  zeale  hath  faid, 

What  checks  the  living  ;  know  I  ferve  the  dead. 

The  dead,  who  needs  no  monumentall  vaults, 

AVith  his  pale  afhes  to  intombe  his  faults. 

Whofe  fms  beget  no  libels,  whom  the  poore 

For  benefit ;  for  worth,  the  rich  adore. 

Who  liv'd  a  folitary  Phaenix  free 

From  the  commerce  with  mifchiefe,  joy'd  to  be 

vStill  gazing  heaven-ward,  where  his  thoughts  did  move, 

Fed  with  the  facred  fire  of  zealous  love. 

Alone  he  flourifht,  'till  the  fatall  houre 

Did  fummon  him,  when  gathering  from  each  flowre 

Their  vertuous  odours,  from  his  perfum'd  nefl, 

He  tooke  his  flight  to  everlafling  reft. 

There  fhine  great  Lord,  and  with  propitious  eyes, 
Looke  downe,  and  fmile  upon  this  facrifice. 


To  my  worthy  Coujln  M^  E.  C. 
In  praife  of  the  City  life,  i7i  the  long  Vacation. 

iLike  the  greeneplufh  which  yourmeadowsweare; 
I  praife  your  pregnant  fields,  which  duly  beare 
Their  wealthy  burden  to  th'induflrious  Bore. 
Nor  doe  I  difallow  that  who  are  poore 


79 

In  nilnde  and  fortune,  thither  fhoiild  retire : 

But  hate  that  he  wlio's  warme  with  ^holy  fire 

Of  any  knowledge,  and  'mong-us  may  feafl 

On  Neclar'd  wit,  fliould  turne  himfelfe  t'  a  bead, 

And  graze  ith'  Countr)\     Why  did  nature  wrong 

So  much  her  paines,  as  to  give  you  a  tongue 

And  fluent  language  ;  If  converfe  you  hold 

With  Oxen  in  the  flail,  and  fiieep  ith'  fold  ? 

But  now  it's  long  Vacation  you  will  fay 

The  towne  is  empty,  and  who  ever  may 

To  th'  pleafure  of  his  Country  home  repairc. 

Fives  from  th'  infecSlion  of  our  Loudon  aire. 

In  this  your  errour.     Now's  the  time  alone 

To  live  here  ;  when  the  City  Dame  is  gone, 

T'  her  houfe  at  Brandfoj'd ;  for  beyond  that  fhe 

Imagines  there's  no  land,  but  Barbary, 

Where  lies  her  hufbands  Fa(flor.     When  from  hence 

Rid  is  the  Country  luflice  whofe  non-fence 

Corrupted  had  the  language  of  the  Inne, 

Where  he  and  his  horfe  litter'd  :  We  beginne 

To  live  in  filence,  when  the  noyfe  oth'  Bench 

Not  deafens  IVe/ImijiJIer,  nor  corrupt  French 

Walkes  Fkd-JIreet  in  her  gowne.     Ruffes  of  the  Barre, 

By  the  Vacations  po\\Te  tranflated  are, 

'I'o  Cut-worke  bands.     And  who  were  bufie  here, 

Are  gone  to  fow  fedition  in  the  fliire. 

The  aire  by  this  is  purg'd,  and  the  Termes  flrife, 

Thus  fled  the  City  :  we  the  civill  life 

Lead  happily.     When  in  the  gentle  way, 

Of  noble  mirth,  I  have  the  long  liv'd  day. 

Contracted  to  a  moment :  I  retire. 

To  my  Cajiara,  and  meet  fuch  a  fire 

Of  mutuall  love  :  that  if  the  City  were 

Infedled,  that  would  purifie  the  ayre. 

y  th'  holy  fire.     1634. 


8o 


L oves   A  niverfarie 
To  the  Sunne. 


Hou  art retum'd  (great  Light)  to  that  blefl  houre 
[n  which  I  firft  by  marriage,  facred  power, 
loyn'd  with  Cajiara  hearts  :  And  as  the  fame 
Thy  luflre  is,  as  then,  fo  is  our  flame  : 
Which  had  increafl,  but  that  by  loves  decree, 
'Twas  fuch  at  firfl,  it  ne're  could  greater  be. 
But  tell  me  (glorious  Lampe)  in  thy  furvey. 
Of  things  below  thee,  what  did  not  decay 
By  age  to  weakneffe  ?     I  fince  that  have  feene 
The  Rofe  bud  forth  and  fade,  the  tree  grow  greene 
And  wither,  and  the  beauty  of  the  field 
With  Winter  wrinkled.     Even  thy  felfe  dofl  yeeld 
Something  to  time,  and  to  thy  grave  fall  nigher. 
But  vertuous  love  is  one  fweet  endleffe  fire. 

Againjl  them  who  lay  unchajlity  to 
the  fex  of  Women. 

Hey  meet  but  with  unwholefome  Springs, 
And  Summers  which  infedlious  are  : 
They  heare  but  when  the  Meremaid  fings, 
And  onely  fee  the  falling  ftarre  : 

Who  ever  dare, 
Afiirme  no  woman  chafte  and  faire. 

Goe  cure  your  feavers  :  and  you'le  fay 
The  Dog-dayes  fcorch  not  all  the  yeare  : 
In  Copper  Mines  no  longer  flay, 
But  travell  to  the  Weft,  and  there 

The  right  ones  lee  : 
And  grant  all  gold's  not  Alchimie. 

What  mad  man  'caufe  the  glow-wormes  flame 
Is  cold,  fweares  there's  no  warmth  in  fire  ? 
Caufe  fome  make  forfeit  of  their  name. 


8i 

And  Have  themfelves  to  mans  defire  ; 

Shall  the  fex  free 
From  guilt,  damn'd  to  the  bondage  be  ? 

Nor  grieve  Cajiara,  though  'twere  fraile, 
Thy  Vertue  then  would  brighter  lliine, 
When  thy  example  fhould  prevaile, 
And  every  woman s  faith  be  thine. 

And  were  there  none  ; 
'Tis  Majefly  to  rule  alone. 

To  the  RigJit  Honoui^able  and  excellently 
lcar7iedy  William  Earlc  ^  St. 

My  Lord, 

He  Laurel!  doth  your  reverend  temples  wreath 
As  aptly  now,  as  when  your  youth  did  breath 
Thofe  tragicke  raptures  which  your  name  fhall 
'From  the  blacke  edict  of  a  tyrant  grave,  [fave 
Nor  fhall  your  Day  ere  fet,  till  the  Sunne  fhall 
From  the  blind  heavens  like  a  cynder  fall; 
And  all  the  elements  intend  their  flrife, 
To  mine  what  they  fram'd  :  Then  your  fames  life, 
When  defp'rate  Time  lies  gafping,  fhall  expire 
Attended  by  the  world  ith'  generall  fire. 
Fame  lengthens  thus  her  felfe.     And  I  to  tread 
Your  flei)s  to  glory,  fearch  among  the  dead, 
Where  Vertue  lies  obfcur'd  ;  that  as  I  give 
Life  to  her  tombe,  I  fpight  of  time  may  live. 
Now  I  refolve  in  triumph  of  my  verfe. 
To  bring  great  Talbot  from  that  forren  hearfe, 
Which  yet  doth  to  her  fright  his  dud  enclofe  : 
Then  to  fmg  Herbert  who  fo  glorious  rofe, 
With  the  fourth  Edward,  that  his  faith  doth  fliine 
Yet  in  the  faith  of  noblefl  Pembrookes  line. 
Sometimes  my  fwelling  fpirits  I  prepare 
To  fpeake  the  mighty  Percy,  neerefl  heire, 
In  merits  as  in  blood,  to  Charles  the  great : 
Then  Darbies  worth  and  greatneffe  to  repeat : 


82 

Or  Moideyes  honour,  or  Afoiinteagles  fame, 
Whofe  valour  lies  eterniz'd  in  his  name. 
But  while  I  thinke  to  fmg  thofe  of  my  bloud, 
And  my  Cajlara^s ;  Loves  unruly  flood 
Breakes  in,  and  beares  away  what  ever  ftands. 
Built  by  my  bufie  fancy  on  the  fands. 

To    C  A  S  T  A  R  A, 

Vpon  an  embrace. 

Out  th'  Husband  Oke,  the  Vine 
Thus  wreathes  to  kiffe  his  leavy  face  : 

Their  flreames  thus  Rivers  joyne, 
And  lofe  themfelves  in  the  embrace. 
But  Trees  want  fence  when  they  infold, 
And  Waters  when  they  meet,  are  cold. 

Thus  Turtles  bill,  and  grone 
Their  loves  into  each  others  eare : 

Two  flames  thus  burne  in  one. 
When  their  curl'd  heads  to  heaven  they  reare. 

But  Birds  want  foule  though  not  defire ; 

And  flames  materiall  foone  expire. 

If  not  prophane ;  we'll  fay 
When  Angels  clofe,  their  joyes  are  fuch. 

For  we  not  love  obey 
That's  baflard  to  a  fleflily  touch. 

Let's  clofe  Cajlara  then,  fmce  thus 

We  patterne  Angels,  and  they  us. 

To  the  Honourable,  G.  T. 

Et  not  thy  grones  force  Eccho  from  her  cave, 
Or  interrupt  her  weeping  o're  that  wave. 
Which  lafL  Narciffus  kifl. :  let  no  darke  grove 
Be  taught  to  whifper  ftories  of  thy  love. 

What  though  the  wind  be  turn'd  ?     Canfl  thou  not  faile 

By  vertue  of  a  cleane  contrary  gale, 


83 

Into  fome  other  Port  ?     AVhere  thou  wilt  find, 

It  was  thy  better  Genius  chang'd  the  wind, 

To  fleere  thee  to  fome  Hand  in  the  AVefl, 

For  wealth  and  pleafure,  that  tranfcends  thy  Eall. 

Though  AJlrodora,  like  a  fiillen  flarre 

Eclipfe  her  felfe  :  Ith'  sky  of  beauty  are 

Ten  thoufand  other  fires,  fome  bright  as  fhe. 

And  who  with  milder  beames,  may  fliine  on  thee. 

Nor  yet  doth  this  Eclipfe  beare  a  portent, 

That  fliould  affright  the  world ;  The  firmament 

Enjoyes  the  light  it  did,  a  Sunne  as  cleare, 

And  the  young  Spring  doth  like  a  Bride  appeare, 

As  fairely  wed  to  the  Thcjfalian  gTOve 

As  e're  it  was  ;  though  flie  and  you  not  love. 

And  we  two,  who  like  two  bright  flars  have  fhin'd 

Ith'  heaven  of  friendfliip,  are  as  firmely  joyn'd 

As  bloud  and  love  firfl  fram'd  us.     And  to  be 

Lov'd,  and  thought  worthy  to  be  lov'd  by  thee, 

Is  to  be  glorious.     Since  fame  cannot  lend 

An  honour,  equals  that  of  Talbots  friend. 

Nor  envie  me  that  my  CaJlaraJs  flame 

Yeelds  me  a  conflant  warmth :  Though  firfl  I  came 

To  marriage  happy  Hands  :  Seas  to  thee 

Will  yeeld  as  fmooth  a  way,  and  winds  as  free. 

Which  fhall  condu6l  thee  (if  hope  may  divine ;) 

To  this  delicious  port :  and  make  love  thine. 

To     C  A  S  T  A  R  A. 

The  reward  of  hinocent  Love. 

E  faw  and  woo'd  each  others  eyes. 
My  foule  contra6led  then  with  thine, 
And  both  burnt  in  one  facrifice. 
J3y  which  our  Marriage  grew  divine. 

Let  wilder  youth,  whofe  foule  is  fenfe, 
Prophane  the  Temple  of  delight. 
And  purchafe  endleffe  penitence, 
With  the  (lolne  pleafure  of  one  night. 


84 

Time  *s  ever  ours,  while  we  difpife 
The  fenfuall  idoll  of  our  clay. 
For  though  the  Sunne  doe  fet  and  rife, 
We  joy  one  everlafting  day. 

Whofe  light  no  jealous  clouds  obfcure, 
While  each  of  us  fhine  innocent. 
The  troubled  flreame  is  ftill  impure, 
With  vertue  flies  away  content. 

And  though  opinion  often  erre, 
Wee'le  court  the  modefl  fmile  of  fame. 
For  fmnes  blacke  danger  circles  her, 
Who  hath  infedtion  in  her  name. 

Thus  when  to  one  darke  filent  roome, 
Death  fhall  our  loving  coffins  thruft ; 
Fame  will  build  columnes  on  our  tombe, 
And  adde  a  perfume  to  our  duft. 

To  my  noblejl  Friend,  Sir  I.  P.  Knight. 

Sir, 

Hough  my  deare  Talhots  Fate  exa6l,  a  fad 
And  heavy  brow ;  my  verfe  fhall  not  be  clad 
For  him  this  houre  in  mourning  :  I  will  wi'ite 
To  you  the  glory  of  a  pompous  night, 
Which  none  (except  fobriety)  who  wit 
Or  cloathes  could  boaft,  but  freely  did  admit. 
I  (who  flill  fmne  for  company)  was  there 
And  tafled  of  the  glorious  fupper,  where 
Meate  was  the  leaft  of  wonder.     Though  the  nefl 
0th'  Phoenix  rifled  feem'd  t'amaze  the  feafl:, 
And  th'  Ocean  left  fo  poore  that  it  alone 
Could  fmce  vant  wretched  herring  and  poore  lohn. 
Lucullus  furfets,  were  but  types  of  this, 
And  whatfoever  riot  mention'd  is 
In  flory,  did  but  the  dull  Zanye  play, 
To  this  proud  night ;  which  rather  wee'le  terme  day  : 
For  th'artificiall  lights  fo  thicke  were  fet, 


8s 

That  bright  Sun  feem'd  this  to  counterfeit 

But  feven  (whom  whether  we  fliould  Sages  call 

Or  deadly  finnes,  He  not  difpute)  were  all 

Invited  to  this  pompe.     And  yet  I  dare 

Pawne  my  lov'd  Mufe,  th'  Hungarian  did  prepare 

Not  halfe  that  quantity  of  vidtuall,  when 

He  layd  his  happy  fiege  to  Nortli?ighcn. 

The  mifl  of  the  perfumes  was  breath'd  fo  thicke 

That  Linx  himfelfe  thought  his  fight  fam'd  fo  quicke, 

Had  there  fcarce  fpyed  one  fober :  For  the  wealth 

Of  the  Canaries  was  exhaufl,  the  health 

Of  his  good  Majeflye  to  celebrate, 

Who'le  judge  them  loyall  fubje6ls  without  that : 

Yet  they,  who  fome  fond  privilege  to  mainteine. 

Would  have  rebeld ;  their  befl  freehold,  their  braine 

Surrender'd  there  ;  and  five  fifteenes  did  pay 

To  drink  his  happy  life  and  reigne.     O  day 

It  was  thy  piety  to  flye  :  th'  hadfl  beene 

Found  acceffaiy  elfe  to  this  fond  fmne. 

But  I  forget  to  fpeake  each  flratagem 

By  which  the  diflies  enter'd,  and  in  them 

Each  lufcious  miracle,  As  if  more  bookes 

Had  \\Titten  beene  oth'  myflery  of  Cookes 

Then  the  Philos'phers  Rone,  here  we  did  fee 

All  wonders  in  the  kitchin  Alchimy : 

But  He  not  have  you  there,  before  you  part 

You  fhall  have  fomething  of  another  art. 

A  banquet  raining  downe  fo  fafl,  the  good 

Old  Patriarch  would  have  thought  a  generall  flood  : 

Heaven  open'd  and  from  thence  a  mighty  fliowre 

Of  Amber  comfits  it  fweete  felfe  did  powre 

Vpon  our  heads,  and  Suckets  from  our  eye 

Like  thickend  clouds  did  fleale  away  the  sky, 

That  it  was  queflion'd  whether  heaven  were 

Black-fryers^  and  each  flarre  a  confe6tioner ; 

But  I  too  long  detaine  you  at  a  feafl 

You  hap'ly  furfet  of;   now  every  guefl 

Is  reeld  downe  to  his  coach  ;  I  licence  crave 

Sir,  but  to  kiffe  your  hands,  and  take  my  leave. 


86 


To  The  Right  Honourable  Archibald 
Earle  of  Av. 

F  your  example  be  obey'd 
I  The  ferious  few  will  live  ith'  filent  fhade  : 

And  not  indanger  by  the  wind 
'^Or  Sunfhine,  the  complexion  of  their  mind  : 
Whofe  beauty  weares  fo  cleare  a  skin 
That  it  decayes  with  the  lead  taint  of  fm. 

Vice  growes  by  cufLome,  nor  dare  we 
Reje6l  it  as  a  flave,  where  it  breathes  free, 

And  is  no  priviledge  denyed ; 
Nor  if  advanc'd  to  higher  place  envyed. 

Wherefore  your  Lordfhip  in  your  felfe 
(Not  lancht  farre  in  the  maine,  nor  nigh  the  Ihelfe 

Of  humbler  fortune)  lives  at  eafe, 
Safe  from  the  rocks  oth'  fhore,  and  flormes  oth'Seas. 

Your  foule's  a  well  built  City,  where 
There's  fuch  munition,  that  no  war  breeds  feare: 

No  rebels  wilde  deftra6lions  move  ; 
For  you  the  heads  have  crufht ;  Rage,  Envy,  Love. 

And  therefore  you  defiance  bid 
To  open  enmity,  or  mifchiefe  hid 

In  fawning  hate  and  fupple  pride, 
Who  are  on  every  corner  fortifide. 

Your  youth  not  rudely  led  by  rage 
Of  blood,  is  now  the  ftory  of  your  age 

Which  without  boafl  you  may  averre 
'Fore  black  eft  danger,  glory  did  prefer : 

Glory  not  purchafl  by  the  breath 
Of  Sycophants,  but  by  encountring  death. 

Yet  wildneffe  nor  the  feare  of  lawes 
Did  make  your  fight,  but  juflice  of  the  caufe. 

For  but  mad  prodigals  they  are 
Of  fortitude,  who  for  it  felfe  love  wan-e. 

When  well  made  peace  hath  clos'd  the  eyes 
Of  difcord,  floath  did  not  your  youth  furprize. 

Your  life  as  well  as  powre,  did  awe 


,j 


I 


I 


8? 

The  bad,  and  to  the  good  was  the  befl  law : 

"When  mod  men  vertue  did  purfue 
In  hope  by  it  to  grow  in  fame  Uke  you. 

Nor  when  you  did  to  court  repaire, 
Did  you  your  manners  alter  with  the  ayre. 

You  did  your  modefly  retaine 
Your  faithfuU  dealing,  the  fame  tongue  and  braine. 

Nor  did  all  the  lb  ft  flattery  there 
Inchant  you  fo,  but  Rill  you  truth  could  heare. 

And  though  your  roofes  were  richly  guilt, 
The  bafis  was  on  no  wards  ruine  built. 

Nor  were  your  vaffals  made  a  prey, 
And  forc't  to  curfe  the  Coronation  day. 

And  though  no  bravery  was  knowne 
To  out-fhine  yours,  you  onely  fpent  your  owne. 

For  'twas  the  indulgence  of  fate, 
To  give  y'  a  moderate  minde,  and  bounteous  flate  ? 

But  I,  my  Lord,  who  have  no  friend 
Of  fortune,  mufl  begin  where  you  doe  end. 

'Tis  dang'rous  to  approach  the  fire 
Of  a6lion ;  nor  is't  fafe,  farre  to  retire. 

Yet  better  lofl  ith'  multitude 
Of  private  men,  then  on  the  flate  t'intrude, 

And  hazard  for  a  doubtfuU  fmile. 
My  flocke  of  fame,  and  inward  peace  to  fpoile. 

He  therefore  nigh  fome  murm'ring  brooke 
That  wantons  through  my  meddowes,  with  a  booke 

With  my  CaJIara,  or  fome  friend. 
My  youth  not  guilty  of  ambition  fpend. 

To  my  own  fhade  (if  fate  permit) 
lie  whifper  fome  foft  mufique  of  my  wit. 

And  flatter  to  my  felfe,  He  fee 
By  that,  flmnge  motion  fleale  into  the  tree. 

But  fl-ill  my  firfl  and  chiefefl  care 
Shall  be  t'appeafe  offended  heaven  with  prayer  : 

And  in  fuch  mold  my  thoughts  to  cafl. 
That  each  day  fhall  be  fpent  as  'twere  my  lafl. 

How  ere  it's  fweete  lufl  to  obey, 
Vertue  though  rugged,  is  the  fafeft  way. 


88 


An   Elegy  upon    The  Honourable   Henry 
Cambell,  foime  to  the  Earle  of  Ar[g]. 

Ts  falfe  Arithmaticke  to  fay  thy  breath 
Expir'd  to  foone,  or  irreligious  death 
Prophan'd  thy  holy  youth.     For  if  thy  yeares 
Be  number'd  by  thy  vertues  or  our  teares, 
Thou  didfl  the  old  Methiifalem  out-live. 
Though  Time,  but  twenty  yeares  account  can  give 
Of  thy  abode  on  earth,  yet  every  houre 
Of  thy  brave  youth  by  vertues  wondrous  powre 
Was  lengthen'd  to  a  yeare.     Each  well-fpent  day 
Keepes  young  the  body,  but  the  foule  makes  gray. 
Such  miracles  workes  goodneffe  :  and  behind 
Th'afl  left  to  us  fuch  flories  of  thy  minde 
Fit  for  example  ;  that  when  them  we  read, 
We  envy  earth  the  treafure  of  the  dead. 
Why  doe  the  fmfull  riot  and  furvive 
The  feavers  of  their  furfets  ?  Why  alive 
Is  yet  diforder'd  greatneffe,  and  all  they 
Who  the  loofe  lawes  of  their  wilde  blood  obey  ? 
Why  lives  the  gamefter.  who  doth  blacke  the  night 
With  cheats  and  imprecations  ?  Why  is  light 
Looked  on  by  thofe  whofe  breath  may  poyfon  it : 
Who  fold  the  vigor  of  their  ftrength  and  wit 
To  buy  difeafes  :  and  thou,  who  faire  truth 
And  vertue  didfl  adore,  loft  in  thy  youth  ? 

But  He  not  queflion  fate.     Heaven  doth  conveigh 
Thofe  firll  from  the  darke  prifon  of  their  clay 
Who  are  moft  fit  for  heaven.     Thou  in  warre 
Hadft  tane  degrees,  thofe  dangers  felt,  which  are 
The  props  on  which  peace  fafely  doth  fubfifl 
And  through  the  Cannons  blew  and  honid  mill 
Hadfl  brought  her  light :  And  now  wert  fo  compleat 
That  naught  but  death  did  want  to  make  thee  great. 

Thy  death  was  timely  then  bright  foule  to  thee, 
And  in  thy  fate  thou  fuffer'dfl  not.     'Twas  we 


89 

iVho  dyed  rob'd  of  thy  life  :  in  whofe  increafe 
Of  reall  glory  both  in  warre  and  peace, 
We  all  did  fhare  :  and  thou  away  we  feare 
Didll  with  thee,  the  whole  llocke  of  honour  beare. 
Each  then  be  his  owne  mourner,  Wee'le  to  thee 
Write  hymnes,  upon  the  world  an  Elegie. 

To    C  A  S  T  A  R  A. 

|Hy  fliould  we  feare  to  melt  away  in  death  ; 
iMay  we  but  dye  together.     When  beneath 
In  a  coole  vault  we  fleepe,  the  world  will  prove 
"  Religious,  and  call  it  the  fhrine  of  Love. 
There,  when  oth'  wedding  eve  fome  beautious  maid, 
Sufpitious  of  the  faith  of  man,  hath  paid 
The  tribute  of  her  vowes  ;  oth'  fudden  fhee 
Two  violets  fprouting  from  the  tombe  will  fee  : 
And  cry  out,  ye  fweet  emblems  of  their  zeale 
Who  live  below,  fprang  ye  up  to  reveale 
The  flory  of  our  future  joyes,  how  we 
The  faithfull  patterns  of  their  love  fliall  be? 

If  not ;  hang  downe  your  heads  opprefl  with  dew, 
And  I  will  weepeand  wither  hence  with  you. 

To     C  A  S  T  A  R  A, 

Of  what  we  were  before  our  creation. 

^Hen  Pelion  wondring  faw,  that  raine  which  fell 
But  now  from  angry  Heaven,  to  Heaven  ward 

fwell : 
When  th'  Indian  Ocean  did  the  wanton  play, 
Mingling  its  billowes  with  the  Balticke  fea : 
And  the  whole  earth  was  water :  O  where  then 
Were  we  Cajlara  ?  In  the  fate  of  men 
Loft  underneath  the  waves?  Or  to  beguile 
Heaven's  juRice,  lurkt  we  in  Noahs  floating  Tfle? 
We  had  no  being  then.     This  flefhly  frame 
Wed  to  a  foule,  long  after,  hither  came 


90 

A  flranger  to  it  felfe.     Thofe  moneths  that  were 
But  the  lafl  age,  no  news  of  us  did  heare. 

What  pompe  is  then  in  us  ?  Who  th'  other  day- 
Were  nothing ;  and  in  triumph  now,  but  clay. 

To  the  Moment  laji  paji. 

Whither  doft  thou  flye?     Cannot  my  vow 
Intreat  thee  tarry  ?  Thou  wert  here  but  now. 
And  thou  art  gone  :  Hke  fhips  which  plough  the 
Sea, 

And  leave  no  print  for  man  to  tracke  their  way. 
O  unfeene  wealth  !  who  thee  did  husband,  can 
Out-vie  the  jewels  of  the  Ocean, 
The  mines  of  th'  earth  !  One  figh  well  fpent  in  thee 
Had  beene  a  purchafe  for  eternity  ! 
We  will  not  loofe  thee  then.      CaJIara,  where     - 
Shall  we  finde  out  his  hidden  fepulcher; 
And  wee'le  revive  him.     Not  the  cruell  ftealth 
Of  fate  fhall  rob  us,  of  fo  great  a  wealth. 

Vndone  in  thrift !  while  we  befought  his  flay, 
Ten  of  his  fellow  moments  fled  away. 

To    C  A  S  T  A  R  A. 

Of  the  knoiv ledge  of  Love. 

Here  fleepes  the  North-wind  when  the  South 
infpires 

Life  in  the  fpring,  and  gathers  into  quires 
^The  fcatter'd  Nightingales ;  whofe  fubtle  eares 
Heard  firft  th'  harmonious  language  of  the  Spheares  ; 
Whence  hath  the  flone  Magneticke  force  t'allure 
Th'  enamour'd  iron  ;  From  a  feed  impure 
Or  naturall  did  firft  the  Mandrake  grow ; 
What  powre  ith'  Ocean  makes  it  ebbe  and  flow  ; 
What  flrange  materials  is  the  azure  skye 
Compacted  of ;  of  what  its^  brightefl  eye 
The  ever  flaming  Sunne ;  what  people  are 
In  th'unknowne  world  ;  what  worlds  in  every  flar; 

1  her.     1635. 


91 

Let  curious  fancies  at  this  fecret  rove ; 
Cajlara  what  we  know,  wee'le  pra6life,  Love. 

To  the  Right  Hono2trable  the  Countcffe  o/C 

Madam, 

Hould  the  cold  Mufcovit,  whofe  furre  and  flove 
Can  fcarfe  prepare  him  heate  enough  for  love, 
I  But  view  the  wonder  of  your  prefence,  he 
"Would  fcorne  his  winters  fliarpefl  injury  : 
And  trace  the  naked  groves,  till  he  found  bayfe 
To  write  the  beautious  triumphs  of  your  prayfe. 
As  a  dull  Poet  even  he  would  fay, 
Th'  unclouded  Sun  had  never  fliowne  them  day 
Till  that  bright  minute ;  that  he  now  admires 
No  more  why  the  coy  Spring  fo  foone  retires 
From  their  unhappy  clyme  :  It  doth  purfue 
The  Sun,  and  he  derives  his  light  from  you. 
Hee'd  tell  you  how  the  fetter'd  Baltick  Sea 
Is  fet  at  freedome,  while  the  yce  away 
Doth  melt  at  your  approach ;  how  by  fo  faire 
Harmonious  beauty,  their  rude  manners  are 
Reduc't  to  order;  how  to  them  you  bring 
The  wealthiefl  mines  below,  above  the  Spring. 
Thus  would  his  wonder  fpeake.     For  he  would  want 
Religion  to  beleeve,  there  were  a  Saint 
Within,  and  all  he  faw  was  but  the  fhrine. 
But  I  here  pay  my  vowes  to  the  devine 
Pure  eflence  there  inclos'd,  which  if  it  were 
Not  hid  in  a  faire  cloud  but  might  appeare 
In  its  full  luflre,  would  make  Nature  live 
In  a  flate  equall  to  her  primitive. 
But  fweetly  thats  obfcur'd.     Yet  though  our  eye 
Cannot  the  fplendor  of  your  foule  defcry 
In  true  perfediion,  by  a  glimmering  light, 
Your  language  yeelds  us,  we  can  gueffe  how  bright 
The  Sunne  within  you  fhines,  and  curfe  th'  unkind 
Eclipfe,  or  elfe  our  felves  for  being  blinde. 
How  haflily  doth  Nature  build  up  man 

1  To  tJie  Right  HonoraUi',  tay  vcrv  <^ood  Lady,  the  Couiitcsse  o/C.     1635. 


92 

To  leave  him  fo  imperfedl  ?     For  he  can 
See  nought  beyond  his  fence  ;  (he  doth  controule 
So  farre  his  fight,  he  nere  difcern'd  a  foule. 
For  had  yours  beene  the  objedl  of  his  eye  ; 
It  had  turn'd  wonder  to  Idolatry. 

The  harmony  of  Love. 

mphion,  O  thou  holy  fhade  ! 

Bring  Orpheus  up  with  thee  : 
That  wonder  may  you  both  invade, 

Hearing  Loves  harmony. 
You  who  are  foule,  not  rudely  made 

Vp,  with  Materiall  eares, 
And  fit  to  reach  the  mufique  of  thefe  fpheares. 

Harke  !  when  Cajlards  orbs  doe  move 

By  my  firfl  moving  eyes, 
How  great  the  Symphony  of  Love, 

But  'tis  the  deflinies 
Will  not  fo  farre  my  prayer  approve, 

To  bring  you  hither,  here 
Left  you  meete  heaven,  for  EHzium  there. 

Tis  no  dull  Sublunary  flame 

Burnes  in  her  heart  and  mine. 
But  fomething  more,  then  hath  a  name. 

So  fubtle  and  divine. 
We  know  not  why,  nor  how  it  came. 

Which  fhall  fhine  bright,  till  fhe 
And  the  whole  world  of  love,  expire  with  me. 


To  my  honoured  friend  Sir  Ed.  P.  Knight. 

Ou'd  leave  the  filence  in  which  fafe  we  are, 
To  liften  to  the  noyfe  of  warre  ; 

And  walkethofe  rugged  paths,  the  fa(flious  tread, 
Who  by  the  number  of  the  dead 


93 

Reckon  their  glories,  and  thinke  greatnefle  flood 

Vnfafe,  till  it  was  built  on  blood. 
Secure  ith'  wall  our  Seas  and  fhips  provide 

(Abhorring  wars  fo  barb'rous  pride 
And  honour  bought  with  flaughter)  in  content 

Lets  breath  though  humble,  innocent. 
Folly  and  madneffe  !     Since  'tis  ods  we  nere 

See  the  frefh  youth  of  the  next  yeare. 
Perhaps  not  the  chail  morne,  her  felfe  difclofe 

Againe,  t'out-blufh  th'  aemulous  rofe, 
Why  doth  ambition  fo  the  mind  diflrcffe 

To  make  us  fcorne  what  we  poffeffe  ? 
And  looke  fo  farre  before  us  ?     Since  all  we 

Can  hope,  is  varied  mifery  ? 
Goe  find  fome  whifpering  fhade  neare  Arne  or  Foe^ 

And  gently  'mong  their  violets  throw 
Your  wearyed  limbs,  and  fee  if  all  thofe  faire 

Enchantments  can  charme  griefe  or  care  ? 
Our  forrowes  flill  purfue  us,  and  when  you 

The  ruin'd  CapitoU  fhall  view 
And  flatues,  a  diforder'd  heape ;  you  can 

Not  cure  yet  the  difeafe  of  man, 
And  banifn  your  owne  thoughts.     Goe  travaile  where 

Another  Sun  and  Starres  appeare. 
And  land  not  toucht  by  any  covetous  fleet, 

And  yet  even  there  your  felfe  you'le  meet. 
Stay  here  then,  and  while  curious  exiles  find 

New  toyes  for  a  fantaflique  mind  ; 
Enjoy  at  home  what's  reall :  here  the  Spring 

By  her  aeriall  quires  doth  fing 
As  fweetly  to  you,  as  if  you  were  laid 

Vnder  the  learn'd  Thejfaliaii  fhade, 
Dire6t  your  eye-fight  inward,  and  you'le  find 

A  thoufand  regions  in  your  mind 
Yet  undifcover'd.     Travell  them,  and  be 

Expert  in  home  Cofmographie. 
This  you  may  doe  fafe  both  from  rocke  and  flielfe : 

Man's  a  whole  world  within  him  felfe. 


94 


To     C  A  S  T  A  R  A. 


Ive  me  a  heart  where  no  impure 

Diforder'd  paffions  rage, 
Which  jealoufie  doth  not  obfcure, 
Not  vanity  t'  expence  ingage, 
Nor  wooed  to  madneffe  by  quient  oathes, 
Or  the  fine  Rhetoricke  of  cloathes, 
Which  not  the  foftneffe  of  the  age 
To  vice  or  folly  doth  decUne ; 
Give  me  that  heart  {CaJIara)  for  'tis  thme. 

Take  thou  a  heart  where  no  new  looke 

Provokes  new  appetite : 
With  no  frefh  charme  of  beauty  tooke, 
Or  wanton  flratagem  of  wit ; 
Not  Idly  wandring  here  and  there, 
Led  by  an  am'rous  eye  or  eare. 
Ayming  each  beautious  marke  to  hit ', 
Which  vertue  doth  to  one  confine  : 
Take  thou  that  heart,  Cajiara,  for  'tis  mine. 

And  now  my  heart  is  lodg'd  with  thee, 

Obferve  but  how  it  flill 
Doth  liflen  how  thine  doth  with  me ; 
And  guard  it  well,  for  elfe  it  will 
Runne  hither  backe ;  not  to  be  where 
I  am,  but  'caufe  thy  heart  is  here. 
But  without  difcipline,  or  skill. 
Our  hearts  fhall  freely  'tweene  us  move ; 
Should  thou  or  I  want  hearts,  wee'd  breath  by  love. 


95 

To     C  A  S  T  A  R  A. 

Of  ti'iie  delight. 

Hy  doth  the  eare  fo  tempt  the  voyce, 
That  cunningly  divides  the  ayre  ? 

Why  doth  the  pallate  buy  the  choyce 
Dehghts  oth'  fea,  to  enrich  her  fare  ? 

As  foone  as  I,  my  eare  obey 

The  Eccho's  lofl  even  with  the  breath. 

And  when  the  fewer  takes  away 

I'me  left  with  no  more  tafle,  then  death. 

Be  curious  in  purfuite  of  eyes 
To  procreate  new  loves  with  thine ; 
Satiety  makes  fence  defpife 
What  fuperflition  thought  divine. 

Quicke  fancy  how  it  mockes  delight  ? 
As  we  conceive,  things  are  not  fuch, 
The  glow-worme  is  as  warme  as  bright, 
Till  the  deceitful!  flame  we  touch. 

When  I  have  fold  my  heart  to  lufl, 
And  bought  repentance  with  a  kiffe 
I  find  the  malice  of  my  dufl, 
That  told  me  hell  contain'd  a  blifie. 

The  Rofe  yeelds  her  fweete  blandifhment 
Lofl  in  the  fold  of  lovers  wreathes, 
The  violet  enchants  the  fent. 
When  earely  in  the  Spring  fhe  breaths. 

But  winter  comes  and  makes  each  flowre 
Shrinke  from  the  pillow  where  it  growes, 
Or  an  intruding  cold  hath  powre 
To  fcorne  the  perfume  of  the  Rofe. 

Our  fences  like  falfe  glaffes  fhow 
Smooth  beauty  where  browes  wrinkled  are, 
And  makes  the  cofen'd  fancy  glow. 
Chafte  vertue's  onely  true^  and  faire. 

1  chaste.     1635. 


96 

To  my  nobleji  Friend,  I.  C.  Ef quire. 

Sir, 

Hate  the  Countries  durt  and  manners,  yet 
I  love  the  filence  ;  I  embrace  the  wit 
And  courtfhip,  flowing  here  in  a  lull  tide.   ^ 
^But  loathe  the  expence,  the  vanity,  and  pride. 
No  place  each  way  is  happy.     Here  I  hold 
Commerce  with  fome,  who  to  my  eare  untold 
(After  a  due  oath  miniared)  the  height 
And  greatneffe  of  each  Rar  fliines  m  the  Rate  : 
The  brightneffe,  the  eclyple,  the  influence. 
With  others  I  commune,  who  tell  me  whence 
The  torrent  doth  of  forraigne  difcord  flow : 
Relate  each  skirmiih,  battle,  overthrow, 
Soone  as  they  happen  ;  and  by  rote  can  tell 
Thofe  Germane  townes,  even  puzzle  me  to  Ipell. 
The  croffe  or  profperous  fate  of  Princes,  they 
Afcribe  to  raflineffe,  cunning,  or  delay : 
And  on  each  aaion  comment,  with  more  skill 
Then  upon  Livy,  did  old  Machavill. 
O  bufie  folly  !  Why  doe  I  my  braine 
Perplex  with  the  dull  pollicies  of  Spaine, 
Or  quicke  defignes  of  France-^     Why  not  repaire 
To  the  pure  innocence  oth'  Country  ayre : 
And  neighbor  thee,  deare  friend  ?     Who  fo  dofl,  give 
Thy  thoughts  to  worth  and  vertue,  that  to  live 
Bleft,  is  to  trace  thy  wayes.     There  might  not  we 
Arme  againfl,  paffion  with  Philolophie  ; 
And  by  the  aide  of  leifure,  fo  controule, 
What-ere  is  earth  in  us,  to  grow  all  foule  ? 
Knowledge  doth  ignorance  ingender  when 
We  fludy  mifl.eries  of  other  men 
And  torraigne  plots.     Doe  but  in  thy  owne  fliade 
(Thy  head  upon  fome  flowry  pillow  laide. 
Kind  Natures  hufwifery)  contemplate  all 
His  ftratagems  who  labours  to  inthrall 
The  world  to  his  great  Mafter ;  and  youle  finde 
Ambition  mocks  it  felte,  and  grafps  the  wind. 


97 

Not  conquell  makes  us  great.     Blood  is  to  dearc 

A  price  for  glor}- :  Honour  doth  appeare 

To  flatefmen  like  a  vifion  in  the  night, 

And  jugler-like  workes  oth'  deluded  fight. 

Th'  unbufied  onely  wife  :  For  no  refpecl 

Indangers  them  to  error ;  They  affe6l 

Truth  in  her  naked  beauty,  and  behold 

Man  with  an  equall  eye,  not  bright  in  gold 

Or  tall  in  title  ;  fo  much  him  they  weigh 

As  Vertue  raifeth  him  above  his  clay. 

Thus  let  us  value  things  ;  And  fmce  we  find 

Time  bends  us  toward  death,  lets  in  our  mind 

Create  new  youth ;  and  arme  againft  the  rude 

Affaults  of  age ;  that  no  dull  folitude 

Oth'  country  dead  our  thoughts,  nor  bufie  care 

Oth'  towne  make  us  not  thinke,  where  now  we  are 

And  whether  we  are  bound.     Time  nere  forgot 

His  journey,  though  his  fleps  we  numbred  not. 


To     C  A  S  T  A  R  A. 

What  Lovers  will  fay  when /lie  and  he  are 

dead. 

Wonder  when  w'are  dead,  what  men  will  fay ; 
Will  not  poore  Orphan  Lovers  weepe. 
The  parents  of  their  Loves  decay ; 
And  envy  death  the  treafure  of  our  fleepe  ? 

Will  not  each  trembling  Virgin  bring  her  feares 

To  th'  holy  filence  of  my  Vrne  ? 

And  chide  the  Marble  with  her  teares, 
Caufe  flie  fo  foone  faith's  obfequie  mufl  moume. 

For  had  Fate  fpar'd  but  Af-ap/iiH  (fhe'le  fay) 

He  had  the  great  example  flood, 

And  forc't  unconflant  man  obey 
The  law  of  Loves  Religion,  not  of  blood. 


98 

And  youth  by  female  perjury  betraid, 

Will  to  CaJlarcCs  fhrine  deplore 

His  injuries,  and  death  obrayd, 
That  woman  lives  more  guilty,  then  before. 

For  while  thy  breathing  purified  the  ayre 

Thy  Sex  (hee'le  fay)  did  onely  move 

By  the  chafte  influence  of  a  faire, 
■V^Tiofe  vertue  Ihin'd  in  the  bright  orbe  of  love. 

Now  woman,  like  a  Meteor  vapor'd  forth 
From  dunghills,  doth  amaze  our  eyes ; 
Not  fhining  with  a  reall  worth, 

But  fubtile  her  blacke  errors  to  difguife. 

Thus  will  they  talke,  Cajlara,  while  our  dull 

In  one  darke  vault  Ihall  mingled  be. 

The  world  will  fall  a  prey  to  luft, 
When  Love  is  dead,  which  hath  one  fate  with  me. 

To  his  Mufe. 

Ere  Virgin  fix  thy  pillars,  and  command 
They  facred  may  to  after  ages  fland 
In  witneffe  of  loves  triumph.     Yet  will  we 
Cajlara,  find  new  worlds  in  Poetry, 
And  conquer  them.     Not  dully  following  thofe 
Tame  lovers,  who  dare  cloth  their  thoughts  in  profe. 
But  we  will  henceforth  more  Religious  prove, 
Concealing  the  high  myfteries  of  love 
From  the  prophane.     Harmonious  like  the  fpheares, 
Our  foules  fliall  move,  not  reacht  by  humane  eares. 
That  Muficke  to  the  Angels,  this  to  fame, 
I  here  commit.     That  when  their  holy  flame, 
True  lovers  to  pure  beauties  would  rehearfe. 
They  may  invoke  the  Genius  of  my  verfe. 


FINIS. 


i 


A  Friend. 


S  a  1)1  a ti.  For  the  free  a?id  open  dif- 
covery  of  thoughts  to  woman  can  net 
paffe  without  an  over  iiccniious 
fanii/iarity,  or  a  juJIIy  occafiotid 
fujpition;  and  friendJJiip  can  nei- 
ther Jland  7vith  vice  or  infamie. 
lie  is  vertuous,  for  loz'e  begot  i?i  fin  is  a  miJJiapen  mon- 
fier,  and  feldonie  out-lives  his  birth.  He  is  noble,  and 
inherits  the  vertues  of  all  his  progenitors ;  though  hap- 
pily unskilfull  to  blazon  his  pat  email  coate;  So  little 
Jiiould  fiobility  ferve  for  fiory,  but  whcfi  it  e7icozirageth 
to  aflioji.  lie  is  fo  valiant,  fcare  could  never  be  listned 
to,  whenJJie  whifper'd  da?iger ;  and  yet  fights  7iot,  unleffe 
religion  confirmes  the  quarrell  lawfidl.  He  fubmits  his 
actions  to  the  governmejit  of  vei'tue,  not  to  the  wilde 
decrees  of  popular  opinion ;  and  when  his  confidence  is 
fully  fatisficd,  he  cares  not  how  mifiake  and  igno7'ance 
interpret  him.  He  hath  fio  much  fortitude  he  can  forgive 
a7i  iiifurie;  and  when  he  hath  overthrowne  his  oppofier, 
7iot  iiifiult  upon  his  weakeneffe.  He  is  aii  abfolute 
gover7ior;  7io  defiroyer  of  his  paffions,  which  he  imployes 
to  the  7wble  increafe  of  vertue.  He  is  wife,  fior  who 
hopes  to  reape  a  harvefi  f-om  the  fiaiids,  77iay  expell  the 
per  fed  offices  of  frie7idfiJiip  fro77i  a  foole.  He  hath  by  a 
liber  all  educatio7i  bee7ie  foft7icd  to  civility  ;  for  that  7'ugged 
ho7iefiy  fio77ie  rude  7ne7i  pofeffe,  is  a7i  i7idigefied  Chaos ; 
which  77iay  co7itai7ie  the  fieedes  ofi  goodiieffe,  but  it  wa7its 
for77ie  a7id  order. 


lOO 


He  is  no  flatterer ;  but  wheii  hefindes  his  friend  any 
way  imperfe^l^  he  freely  but  gently  informes  him ;  nor 
yet  fliall  fome  few  errors  cancell  the  bond  of  friendfhip  ; 
becaufe  he  remembers  no  endeavours  can  raife  ma7i  above 
his  frailety.  He  is  as  flow  to  enter  into  that  title ^  as  he 
is  to  for  fake  it;  a  monflrous  vice  mi  ft  difobliege^  becaufe 
an  extraordinary  vertue  did  flrfl  unite;  and  when  he 
parts,  he  doth  it  without  a  duell.  He  is  7ieither  effemi- 
nate, 7ior  a  common  courtier;  the  flrfl  is  fo  pafftonate  a 
doater  upon  himfelfe,  hee  cannot  fpare  love  enough  to  bee 
jufily  named  friendfhip  :  the  latter  hath  his  love  fo  dif 
fuflve  among  the  beauties,  that  man  is  not  conflderable. 
He  is  not  accuflomed  to  any  fordid  way  of  gaine,  for 
who  is  any  way  mechanicke,  will  fell  his  friend  upon 
more  profltable  termes.  He  is  bountifidl,  and  thinkes 
no  treafure  of  fortune  equall  to  the  prefervation  of  him 
he  loves ;  yet  not  fo  lavifh,  as  to  buy  friendfJiip  and  per- 
haps afterward flnde  hiinfelfe  overfee^ie  in  the  purchafe. 
He  is  not  exceptious,  for  fealoifle  proceedes  from  weake- 
neffe,  and  his  vertues  quit  him  from  fufpitions.  He 
freely  gives  advice,  but  fo  little  peremptoiy  is  his  opinion 
that  he  ingenuoifly  fubmits  it  to  an  abler  fudgei7ient. 
He  is  ope7i  i7i  expreffi07t  of  his  thoughts  a7id  eafeth  his 
77iela7icholy  by  inlargi7ig  it;  a7id  710  Sanctuary  p7'eferves 
fo  fafely,  as  he  his  f7He7id  afliidled.  He  77iakes  ufe  of  no 
e7igi7ies  of  his  frie7idfliip  to  extort  a  fecret;  but  if  com77iitted 
to  his  charge,  his  heart  receives  it,  and  that  and  it  co7fie 
both  to  light  together.  Li  life  he  is  the  77iofl  a77iiable 
objeH:  to  the  foule,  in  death  the  77iofl  deplorable. 


The    FiLUCi^als    of    the    Ho- 
nourable, my  bejl  friend  and 
Kinfjnan^  George  Talbot, 

Efquire. 

Elegic,  I. 

Were  malice  to  the  fame ;  to  weepe  alone 
And  not  enforce  an  imiverfall  groane    [plaine  : 
From  ruinous  man,  and  make  the  World  com- 
Vet  rie  forbid  my  griefe  to  be  prophane 
In  mention  of  thy  prayfe  ;  I'le  fpeake  but  truth 
Yet  write  more  honour  than  ere  fliin'd  in  youth. 
I  can  relate  thy  bufmeffe  here  on  earth, 
Thy  myflery  of  life,  thy  nobleR  birth 
Out-fliin'd  by  nobler  vertue  :  but  how  farre 
Th'  hail  tane  thy  journey  'bove  the  highefl  liar, 
I  cannot  fpeake,  nor  whether  thou  art  in 
Commiffion  with  a  Throne,  or  Cherubin. 
Paffe  on  triumphant  in  thy  glorious  way, 
Till  thou  hafl  reacht  the  place  affign'd :  we  may 
Without  diflurbing  the  harmonious  Spheares, 
Bathe  here  below  thy  memory  in  our  teares. 
Ten  dayes  are  pall,  fmce  a  dull  wonder  feis'd 
My  acflive  foule :  Loud  flormes  of  fighes  are  rais'd 
By  empty  griefes  ;  they  who  can  utter  it, 
Doe  no  vent  forth  their  forrow,  but  their  wit. 
I  flood  like  Niobe  without  a  grone, 
Congeal'd  into  that  monumentall  flone 
That  doth  lye  over  thee  :  I  had  no  roome 
For  witty  gi"iefe,  fit  onely  for  thy  tombe. 
And  friendffiips  monument,  thus  had  I  flood  ; 
But  that  the  flame  I  beare  thee,  warm'd  my  blood 
With  a  new  life.     He  like  a  funerall  fire 
But  bume  a  while  to  thee,  and  then  expire. 


I02 


Elegie,  2. 

Alhot  is  dead.     Like  lightning  which  no  part 
0th'  body  touches,  but  firfl  llrikes  the  heart, 
This  word  hath  murder'd  me.    Ther's  not  in  all 
The  flocke  of  forrow,  any  charme  can  call 
Death  fooner  up.     For  mufiqu's  in  the  breath 
Of  thunder,  and  a  fweetneffe  even  ith'  death 
That  brings  with  it,  if  you  with  this  compare 
All  the  loude  noyfes,  which  torment  the  ayre. 
They  cure  (Phyfitians  fay)  the  element 
Sicke  with  dull  vapors,  and  to  banifliment 
Confine  infe6lions  ;  but  this  fatall  fhreeke, 
Without  the  lead  redreffe,  is  utter'd  like 
The  lafL  dayes  fummons,  when  Earths  trophies  lye 
A  fcatter'd  heape,  and  time  it  felfe  mufl  dye. 
What  now  hath  life  to  boafl  of  ?  Can  I  have 
A  thought  leffe  darke  than  th'  horror  of  the  grave  \ 

Now  thou  dofl  dwell  below?  Wer't  not  a  fault  ^* 

Pafl  pardon,  to  raife  fancie  'bove  thy  vault  ?  "-^ 

Hayle  Sacred  houfe  in  which  his  reliques  fleepe  ? 
Bleft  marble  give  me  leave  t'  approach  and  weepe, 
Thefe  vowes  to  thee  !  for  fmce  great  Talbofs  gone 

Downe  to  thy  filence,  I  commerce  with  none 

But  thy  pale  people  :  and  in  that  confute 

MifLaking  man,  that  dead  men  are  not  mute. 

Delicious  beauty,  lend  thy  flatter'd  eare 

Accuflom'd  to  warme  whifpers,  and  thou'lt  heare 

How  their  cold  language  tels  thee,  that  thy  skin 

Is  but  a  beautious  fhrine,  in  which  black  fm 

Is  Idohz'd ;  thy  eyes  but  Spheares  where  lufl 

Hath  its  loofe  motion ;  and  thy  end  is  dufl. 

Great  Atlas  of  the  ftate,  defcend  with  me. 

But  hither,  and  this  vault  fhall  furnifli  thee 

With  more  avifo's,  then  thy  coflly  fpyes. 

And  fhow  how  falfe  ai  e  all  thofe  myfleries 

Thy  Se6l  receives,  and  though  thy  pallace  fwell 

With  envied  pride,  'tis  here  that  thou  mufl  dwell. 

It  will  inflru6l  you,  Courtier,  that  your  Art 


I03 

or  outward  fmootlmcfTe  and  a  rugged  heart 

But  cheates  your  felf,  and  all  tbofe  fubtill  wayes 

You  tread  to  greatnefle,  is  a  fatall  maze 

Where  you  your  felfe  fliall  loofe,  for  though  you  breath 

Vpward  to  pride,  your  center  is  beneath. 

And  'twill  thy  Rhetorick  falfe  flefh  confound ; 

Which  flatters  thy  fraile  thoughts,  no  tune  can  wound 

This  unarm'd  frame.     Here  is  true  eloquence 

Will  teach  my  foule  to  triumph  over  fence, 

Which  hath  its  period  in  a  grave,  and  there 

Showes  what  are  all  our  pompous  furfets  here. 

Great  Orator!  deare  TalbotX  Still,  to  thee 

May  I  an  auditor  attentive  be  : 

And  pioufly  maintaine  the  fame  commerce 

We  held  in  life !  and  if  in  my  rude  verfe 

I  to  the  world  may  thy  fad  precepts  read : 

I  will  on  earth  interpret  for  the  dead. 


Elegie,  3. 


M 


|Et  me  contemplate  thee  (faire  foule)  and  though 
ll  cannot  tracke  the  way,  which  thou  didfL  goe 
]In  thy  ccelefliall  journey  ;  and  my  heart 
'Expanffion  wants,  to  thinke  what  now  thou  art 
How  bright  and  wide  thy  glories  ;  yet  I  may 
Remember  thee,  as  thou  wert  in  thy  clay. 
Befl  object  to  my  heart  !  what  vertues  be 
Inherent  even  to  the  leaft  thought  of  thee  ! 
Death  which  to  th'  vig'rous  heate  of  youth  brings  feare 
In  its  leane  looke ;  doth  like  a  Prince  appeare, 
Now  glorious  to  my  eye,  fmce  it  poffefl 
The  wealthy  empyre  of  that  happie  chefl 
Which  harbours  thy  rich  dufl ;  for  how  can  he 
Be  thought  a  bank'rout  that  embraces  thee? 
Sad  midnight  whifpers  with  a  greedy  eare 
I  catch  from  lonely  graves,  in  hope  to  heare 
Newes  from  the  dead,  nor  can  pale  vifions  fright 
His  eye,  who  fmce  thy  death  feeles  no  delight 
In  ma.is  acquaintance.     Mem'ry  of  thy  fate 


I04 

Doth  in  me  a  fublimer  foule  create. 

And  now  my  forrow  followes  thee,  I  tread 

The  milkie  way,  and  fee  the  fnowie  head 

Of  Atlas  farre  below,  while  all  the  high 

Swolne  buildings  feeme  but  atomes  to  my  eye. 

I'me  heighten'd  by  my  ruine  ;  and  while  I 

Weepe  ore  the  vault  where  the  fad  alhes  lye. 

My  foule  with  thine  doth  hold  commerce  above ; 

Where  we  difcerne  the  ftratagems,  which  Love, 

Hate,  and  ambition,  ufe,  to  cozen  man ; 

So  fraile  that  every  blafL  of  honour  can 

Swell  him  above  himfelfe,  each,  adverfe  guR 

Him  and  his  glories  fhiver  into  duft. 

How  fmall  feemes  greatneffe  here  !  How  not  a  fpan 

His  empire,  who  commands  the  Ocean. 

Both  that,  which  boafts  fo  much  it's  mighty  ore 

And  th'  other,  which  with  pearle,  hath  pav'd  its'  fhore 

Nor  can  it  greater  feeme,  when  this  great  All 

For  which  men  quarrell  fo,  is  but  a  ball 

Cafl  downe  into  the  ayre  to  fport  the  ftarres. 

And  all  our  generall  mines,  mortall  warres. 

Depopulated  dates,  caus'd  by  their  fway ; 

And  mans  fo  reverend  wifedome  but  their  play. 

From  thee,  deare  Talbot,  living  I  did  learne 

The  Arts  of  life,  and  by  thy  light  difcerne 

The  truth,  which  men  difpute.     But  by  thee  dead 

I'me  taught,  upon  the  worlds  gay  pride  to  tread  : 

And  that  way  fooner  mafter  it,  than  he 

To  whom  both  th'*  Indies  tributary  be. 


Elegie,  4. 


Y  name,  dear  friend,  even  thy  expiring  breath 
Did  call  upon  :  affirming  that  thy  death 
Would  wound  my  poor  fad  heart.   Sad  it  muflbe 
Indeed,  loft  to  all  thoughts  of  mirth  in  thee. 
My  Lord,  if  I  with  licence  of  your  teares, 
(Which  your  great  brother's  hearfe  as  dyamonds  weares 
T'  enrich  deaths  glory)  mry  but  fpeake  my  owne : 


\i 


I05 

He  prove  it,  that  no  forrow  ere  was  knowne 

Reall  as  mine.     All  other  mourners  keepe 

In  griefe  a  method :  without  forme  I  weepe. 

The  fonne  (rich  in  his  fathers  fate)  hath  eyes 

Wet  jufl  as  long  as  are  the  obfequies. 

The  widow  fonnerly  a  yeare  doth  fpend 

In  her  fo  courtly  blackes.     But  for  a  Friend 

We  weepe  an  age,  and  more  than  th'  Achorit,  have 

Our  very  thoughts  confin'd  within  a  Grave. 

Chafl  Love  who  hadfl  thy  tryumph  in  my  flame 

And  thou  Cajlara  who  had  hadft  a  name, 

But  for  this  forrow  glorious  :  Now  my  verfe 

Is  loft  to  you,  and  onely  on  Talbots  herfe 

Sadly  attends.     And  till  times  fatall  hand 

Ruines,  what's  left  of  Churches,  there  fliall  ftand. 

There  to  thy  felfe,  deare  Talbot^  He  repeate 

Thy  owne  brave  ftory  ;  tell  thy  felfe  how  great 

Thou  wert  in  thy  mindes  Empire,  and  how  all 

Who  out-live  thee,  fee  but  the  Funerall 

Of  glory  :  and  if  yet  fome  vertuous  be, 

They  but  weake  apparitions  are  of  thee. 

So  fetled  were  thy  thoughts,  each  adlion  fo 

Difcreetely  ordered,  that  nor  ebbe  nor  flow 

Was  ere  perceiv'd  in  thee  :  each  word  mature 

And  every  fceane  of  life  from  fmne  fo  pure 

That  fcarce  in  its  whole  hiftory,  we  can 

Finde  vice  enough,  to  fay  thou  wert  but  man. 

Horror  to  fay  thou  wert !     Curft  that  w^e  muft 

Addrefle  our  language  to  a  little  duft. 

And  feeke  for  Talbot  there.     Injurious  fate, 

To  lay  my  lifes  ambition  defolate. 

Yet  thus  much  comfort  have  I,  that  I  know. 

Not  how  it  can  give  fuch  another  blow. 


Elegie,  5. 

Haft  as  the  Nuns  firft  vow,  as  fairely  bright 
As  when  by  death  her  Soule  fhines  in  full  light 
Freed  from  th'  Eclipfe  of  earth,  each  word  that 
From  thee  (deare  7a/<^<?/)  did  beget  a  flame  [came 


io6 

T'  enkindle  vertue  :  which  fo  faire  by  thee 

Became,  man,  that  bhnd  mole,  her  face  did  fee. 

But  now  t'our  eye  fhe's  loft,  and  if  flie  dwell 

Yet  on  the  earth ;  fhe  's  coffin'd  in  the  cell 

Of  fome  cold  Hermit ;  who  fo  keepes  her  there, 

As  if  of  her  the  old  man  jealous  were. 

Nor  ever  fhowes  her  beauty,  but  to  fome 

Carthufiaii^  who  even  by  his  vow,  is  dumbe  ! 

So  'mid  the  yce  of  the  farre  Northern  fea, 

A  flarre  about  the  Articke  Circle,  may 

Then  ours  yeeld  clearer  light ;  yet  that  but  fhall 

Serve  at  the  frozen  Pilots  funerall. 

Thou  (brighteft  conflellation)  to  this  maine 

Which  all  we  tinners  traffique  on,  didfl  daigne 

The  bounty  of  thy  fire,  which  with  fo  cleare 

And  confLant  beames  did  our  frayle  veffels  fleare, 

That  fafely  we,  what  florme  fo  ere  bore  fway, 

Pafl  ore  the  rugged  Alpes  of  th'  angry  Sea. 

But  no  V  we  fayle  at  randome.     Every  rocke 

The  folly  doth  of  our  ambition  mocke 

And  fplits  our  hopes  :  To  every  Sirens  breath 

We  liflen  and  even  court  the  face  of  death, 

If  painted  ore  by  pleafure  :  Every  wave 

Ift  hath  delight  w'  embrace  though  't  prove  a  grave  : 

So  ruinous  is  the  defedl  of  diee, 

To  th'  undone  world  in  gen'rall.     But  to  me 

Who  liv'd  one  life  with  thine,  drew  but  one  breath, 

Poffefl  with  th'  fame  mind  and  thoughts,  'twas  death. 

And  now  by  fate  :  I  but  my  felfe  furvive, 

To  keepe  his  mem'ry,  and  my  griefes  alive. 

Where  fliall  I  then  begin  to  weepe  ?     No  grove 

Silent  and  darke,  but  is  prophan'd  by  Love  : 

With  his  warme  whifpers,  and  faint  idle  feares. 

His  bufie  hopes,  loud  fighes,  and  caufeleffe  teares 

Each  eare  is  fo  enchanted ;  that  no  breath 

Is  liflned  to,  which  mockes  report  of  death. 

I'le  turne  my  griefe  then  inward  and  deplore 

My  ruine  to  my  lelfe,  repeating  ore 

The  flory  of  his  vertues ;  untill  I 

Not  write,  but  am  my  felte  his  Elegle. 


107 


Elcgicy  6. 

■lOe  flop  the  fwlft-wing'd  moments  in  their  flight 
To  their  yet  unknowne  coafl,  goe  hinder  night 
^  From  its  approach  on  day,  and  force  day  rife 
From  the  faireEafl.  of  fome  bright  beauties  eyes: 
Elfe  vaunt  not  the  proud  miracle  of  verfe. 
It  hath  no  powre.     For  mine  from  his  blacke  herfe 
Redeemes  not  Talbot^  who  cold  as  the  breath 
Of  winter,  coffin'd  lyes  ;  filent  as  death, 
Stealing  on  th'  Anch'rit,  who  even  wants  an  eare 
To  breath  into  his  foft  expiring  prayer. 
For  had  thy  life  beene  by  thy  vertues  fpun 
Out  to  a  length,  thou  hadil  out-liv'd  the  Sunne 
And  clos'd  the  worlds  great  eye  :  or  were  not  all 
Our  wonders  fiction,  from  thy  funerall 
Thou  hadfl  received  new  life,  and  liv'd  to  be 
The  conqueror  o're  death,  infpir'd  by  me. 
But  all  we  Poets  glory  in,  is  vaine 
And  empty  triumjjh  :  Art  cannot  regaine 
One  poore  houre  lofl,  nor  reskew  a  fmall  flye 
By  a  fooles  finger  deflinate  to  dye. 
Live  then  in  thy  true  life  (great  foule)  for  fet 
At  liberty  by  death  thou  owefl  no  debt 
T*  exa6ling  Nature  :  Live,  freed  from  the  fport 
Of  lime  and  fortune  in  yand'  flarry  court 
A  glorious  Potentate,  while  we  below 
But  faOiion  waves  to  mitigate  our  woe. 
We  follow  campes,  and  to  our  hopes  propofe 
Th'  infulting  victor ;  not  remembring  thofe 
Difmembred  trunkes  who  gave  him  vi6lory 
By  a  loath'd  fate  :  We  covetous  Merchants  be 
And  to  our  aymes  pretend  treafure  and  fvvay, 
Forgetfull  of  the  treafons  of  the  Sea. 
The  fhootings  of  a  wounded  confcience 
We  patiently  fuflaine  to  ferve  our  fence 
With  a  fliort  pleafure;  So  we  empire  gaine 
And  rule  the  fate  of  bufmeffe,  the  fad  paine 


io8 

Of  aaion  we  contemne,  and  the  affright 
Which  with  pale  vifions  ftill  attends  our  night. 
Our  joyes  falfe  apparitions,  but  our  feares 
Are  certaine  prophecies.     And  till  our  eares 
Reach  that  cseleftiall  mufique,  which  thine  now 
So  cheerefully  receive,  we  mufl  allow 
No  comfort  to  our  griefes  :  from  which  to  be 
Exempted,  is  in  death  to  follow  thee. 


Elegie,  7. 

Here  is  no  peace  in  fmne.     Eternal!  war 
Doth  rage  'mong  vices.     But  all  vertues  are 
Friends  'mong  themfelves,  and  choifefL  accents 
Harfh  Eccho's  of  their  heavenly  harmonic,  [be 
While  thou  didfl  live  we  did  that  union  finde 
In  the  fo  faire  republick  of  thy  mind, 
Where  difcord  never  fwel'd.     And  as  we  dare 
Affirme  thofe  goodly  flruftures,  temples  are 
Where  well-tun'd  quires  flrike  zeale  into  the  eare  : 
The  mufique  of  thy  foule  made  us  fay,  there 
God  had  his  Altars ;  every  breath  a  fpice 
And  each  religious  adl  a  facrifice. 
But  death  hath  that  demoliiht.     All  our  eye 
Of  thee  now  fees  doth  like  a  Cittie  lye 
Raz'd  by  the  cannon.     Where  is  then  that  flame 
That  added  warmth  and  beauty  to  thy  frame  ? 
Fled  heaven-ward  to  repaire,  with  its  pure  fire 
The  loffes  of  fome  maim'd  Seraphick  quire  ? 
Or  hovers  it  beneath,  the  world  t'  uphold 
From  generall  mine,  and  expell  that  cold 
Dull  humor  weakens  it  ?     If  fo  it  be ; 
My  forrow  yet  mufl  prayfe  fates  charity. 
But  thy  example  (if  kinde  heaven  had  daignd 
Frailty  that  favour)  had  mankind  regaind 
To  his  firft  purity.     For  that  the  wit 
Of  vice,  might  not  except  'gainll  th'  Ancherit 
As  too  to  flrickt ;  thou  didR  uncloyfler'd  live  : 
Teaching  the  foule  by  what  prefervative, 


109 

She  may  from  fmnes  contagion  live  fecure, 

Though  all  the  ayre  fhe  fuckt  in,  were  impure. 

In  this  darke  mill  of  error  with  a  cleare 

Vnfpotted  light,  thy  vertue  did  appeare 

T'  obrayd  corrupted  man.     How  could  the  rage 

Of  untam'd  lufl  have  fcorcht  decrepit  age ; 

Had  it  feene  thy  chafl  youth  ?     Who  could  the  wealth 

Of  time  have  fpent  in  ryot,  or  his  health 

By  furfeits  forfeited  ;  if  he  had  feene 

What  temperance  had  in  thy  dyet  beene  ? 

What  glorious  foole  had  vaunted  honours  bought 

By  gold  or  practife,  or  by  rapin  brought 

From  his  fore-fathers,  had  he  underflood 

How  Talbot  valued  not  his  owne  great  blood  ! 

Had  Politicians  feene  him  fcorning  more 

The  unfafe  pompe  of  greatneffe,  then  the  poore 

Thatcht  roofes  of  fliepheards,  where  th'  unruly  wind 

(A  gentler  florme  than  pride)  uncheckt  doth  find 

Still  free  admittance  :  their  pale  labors  had 

Beene  to  be  good,  not  to  be  great  and  bad. 

But  he  is  lofL  in  a  blind  vault,  and  we 

Mufl  not  admire  though  fmnes  now  frequent  be 

And  uncontrol'd  :  Since  thofe  faire  tables  where 

The  Law  was  writ  by  death  now  broken  are, 

By  death  extinguifht  is  that  Star,  whofe  light 

Did  fhine  fo  faithfull  :  that  each  fhip  fayl'd  right 

Which  fleer'd  by  that.     Nor  marvell  then  if  we, 

(That  failing)  lofl  in  this  worlds  tempefl  be. 

But  to  what  Orbe  fo  ere  thou  dofl  retyre, 

Far  from  our  ken  :  tis  blefl,  while  by  thy  fire 

Enlighten'd.     And  fince  thou  mufl  never  here 

Be  feene  againe  :  may  I  ore-take  thee  there. 

Elegie,  8. 

^Oafl  not  the  rev'rend  Vatican,  nor  all 

The  cunning  Pompe  of  the  Efcuriall.  [room 
Though  there  both  th'  Indies  met  in  each  fmal 
rh'  are  fhort  in  treafure  of  this  precious  tombe. 


no 

Here  is  th'  Epitome  of  wealth,  this  chefl 
Is  Natures  chiefe  Exchequer,  hence  the  Eafl 
When  it  is  purified  by  th'  gen erall  fire 
Shall  fee  thefe  now  pale  afhes  fparkle  higher 
Then  all  the  gems  Ihe  vants  :  tranfcending  far 
In  fragrant  luflre  the  bright  morning  ftar. 
Tis  true,  they  now  feeme  darke.     But  rather  we 
Have  by  a  catara6l  loft  fight,  then  he 
Though  dead  his  glory.     So  to  us  blacke  night 
Brings  darkeneffe,  when  the  Sun  retaines  his  light. 
Thou  ecHps'd  dull !     Expe6ling  breake  of  day 
From  the  thicke  mifls  about  thy  Tombe,  I'le  pay 
Like  the  jufL  Larke,  the  tribute  of  my  verfe 
I  will  invite  thee,  from  thy  envious  herfe 
To  rife,  and  'bout  the  World  thy  beames  to  fpread, 
That  we  may  fee,  there's  brightneffe  in  the  dead. 
My  zeale  deludes  me  not.     What  perfumes  come 
From  th'  happy  vault  ?     In  her  fweete  martyrdome 
The  nard  breathes  never  fo,  nor  fo  the  rofe 
When  the  enamor'd  Spring  by  kiffing  blowes 
Soft  blulhes  on  her  cheeke,  nor  th'  early  Eafl 
Vying  with  Paradice,  ith'  Phoenix  nefl. 
Thefe  gentle  perfumes  ulher  in  the  day 
Which  from  the  night  of  his  difcolour'd  clay 
Breakes  on  the  fudden :  for  a  Soule  fo  bright 
Of  force  muft  to  her  earth  contribute  light. 
But  if  w'  are  fo  far  blind,  we  cannot  fee 
The  wonder  of  this  truth  ;  yet  let  us  be 
Not  infidels  :  nor  like  dull  Atheifts  give 
Our  felves  fo  long  to  luft,  till  we  believe 
(T'  allay  the  griefe  of  fmne)  that  we  fhall  fall 
To  a  loath'd  nothing  in  our  Funerall. 

The  bad  mans  death  is  horror.     But  the  jufl 
Keepe  fomething  of  his  glory  in  his  dufl. 


Fiisris. 


i  I 


CASTARA : 

THE 

THIRD    PART. 


LONDON 

Printed  by  Tlio.  Cotes,  for 
Will.  Cooke     1640. 


112 


i 

1 

A  Holy  Man 

S  onely  Happie.  For  ififelicity  and fmne 
were  borne  twinnes ;  Or  rather  like 
fome  prodigie  with  two  bodies^  both 
draw  a7td  expire  the  fame  breath, 
Catholique  faith  is  the  foundation 
071  which  he  ere5ls  Religion;  know- 
ing it  a  ruinous  madnejfe  to  build  in  the  ayre  of 
a  private  fpirit,  or  on  the  fands  of  any  new  fchifme. 
His  i7npietie  is  not  fo  bold  to  bri7tg  divinity  downe 
to  the  miflake  of  reafon,  or  to  de7iy  thofe  7nifleries  his 
apprehenfi07i  reacheth  not.  His  obedience  77ioves  flill  by 
direction  of  the  Magiflrate :  And  fhould  C07ifcie7ice  in- 
forme  Mth  that  the  C077i7nand  is  unjust;  he  judgeth  it 
nevertheleffe  high  treafon  by  rebellion  to  make  good  his 
te7iets ;  as  it  were  the  bafefl  coivardize,  by  difsi77iulation 
of  religio7t,  to  preferve  te77iporall  respeBs.  Hee  knoives 
hwna7ie  pollicie  but  a  crooked  rule  of  a^io7i :  a7id  there- 
fore by  a  difl7nist  of  his  ow7ie  k7iowledge  attaines  it : 
Co7ifou7idi7ig  with  fuper7iaturall  illu77ii7iatio7i,  the 
opi7iio7iated  judg77ie7it  of  the  wife.  Lt  prosperity  he 
gratefully  ad77iires  the  botmty  of  the  Ahiighty  giver,  a7id 
ufeth,  7iot  abitfeth  ple7ity :  But  in  adverfity  hee  remai7ies 
U7tfhake7i,  a7id  like  fo77ie  emi7ie7it  77iou7itaine  hath  his 
head  above  the  clouds.  For  his  happi7iefj'e  is  not  meteo7'- 
like  exhaled  fro77i  the  vapors  of  this  wo7'ld ;  but  fhi7ies  a 
fixtflarre,  which  wJmi  by  77iisfortu7ie  it  appear es  to  fall ^ 


"3 

onely  cajls  away  the  flimie  matter.  Poverty  he  neither 
f cares  nor  covets^  hut  cheer ef idly  entertaines ;  imaginiu^^ 
it  the  fire  which  tries  vertue :  Nor  how  tyrannically  fi)- 
ei'er  it  ufurpe  on  him,  doth  he  pay  to  it  a  figh  or  wriucklc  : 
for  he  who  fuffers  want  without  rclunancie,  7nay  be 
poore  not  miferable.  He  fees  the  covetous  prosper  by 
ufury,  yet  waxeth  not  leane  with  envie :  and  whe?i  t.  ':e 
profieritie  of  the  impious  flourifJi,  he  quefliones  not  the 
divine  justice ;  for  temporall  rewards  difiinguijli  not  ei'cr 
the  fnerits  of  men :  a?id  who  hath  beene  of  coimcel  with 
the  y£ternall?  Fame  he  weighes  not,  but  efieemes  a 
fmoake,  yet  fuch  as  carries  with  it  the  fiueetefi  odour,  and 
rifeth  ufually  from  the  Sacrifice  of  our  befl  aftions. 
Pride  he  difdaines,  when  he  fifides  it  fwelling  in  him- 
felfe;  but  eafily  forgiveth  it  in  another:  Nor  can  any  mans 
error  in  life,  make  him  finne  in  cenfure,  fince  feldome  the 
folly  we  condemne  is  fo  culpable  as  the  feverity  of  our 
judgement.  He  doth  not  malice  the  over-fpreading growth 
of  his  equalls  :  but  pitties,  7iot  defpifeth  the  fall  of  any 
77ia?i :  Eflee77ii7ig  yet  no  fior7ne  of  fortune  da7igcrous, 
but  what  is  rais'd  through  our  owne  demerit.  When  he 
lookes  071  others  vices,  he  values  not  hi77ifelfe  vertuous  by 
co77iparifo7i,  but  exa?7ii7ies  his  owne  defers,  a7id  findes 
77iatter  e7iough  at  home  for  reprehe7ifion  :  In  converfation 
his  carriage  is  neither  plaufible  to  flattery,  nor  referv'dto 
rigor :  but  fo  de7neanes  hi77ifelfe  as  created  for  focietie. 
In  folitude  he  re77ie7nbers  his  better  part  is  A7igelicall ; 
and  therefo7'e  his  77tinde praHifeth  the  befl  difcourfe  with- 
out afflflance  of  i7iferiour  Orga7ts.  lufl  is  the  Baflliske 
heflyes,  a  Serpe7tt  of  the  7nofl  deflroying  veno7ne :  for  it 

H 


114 

hlajls  al  plants  with  the  bi'cath,    and  carries  the  mojl 
murdering  Artillery  in  the  eye:  He  is  ever  merry  but 
Jim  modejl.      Not  dijfolved  into  imdecent  laughter,  or 
trickled  with  wit  fcurrilous  or  injurious.     He  cimningly 
fearcheth  into  the  vertices  of  others,  and  liberally  com- 
mends them :  but  buries  the  vices  of  the  ijnperfe^  in  a 
charitable  filence,  whofe  manners  he  reformes  not  by  in- 
veflives  but  example:    In  prayer  he  is  frequejit  not 
apparejit :  yet  as  he  labours  not  the  opinion,  fo  he  feares 
7iot  the  fcandall  of  being  thought  good.      He  every  day 
travailes  his  meditations  tip  to  heaven,  and  never  findes 
himfelf   wearied    with    the  journey:    but    whett    the 
necejfities  of  nature  retuime  him   dowiie  to   earth,   he 
efleemes  it  a  place,  hee  is  condemned  to.     Devotion  is  his 
Miflreffe  on  which  he  is  pafsio7iately  enamord:  for  that 
he  hath  found  the  mofl  Soveraigne  antidote  aga\f\njl  fmne, 
and  the  onley  balfome  powejfull  to  cure  thofe  wounds  hee 
hath  receav'd  through  frailety.      To  live  he  knowes  a 
benefit,  ajid  the  coiitempt  of  it  ingratitude,  and  therefore 
loves,  but  not  doates  on  life.     Death  how  deformed  foever 
an  afpe^  it  weares,  he  is  not  frighted  with :  fifice  it 
not  ajinihilates,  but  uncloudes  the  foule.     He  therefore 
ftands  every  movement  prepared  to  dye:    a?id  though 
he  freely  yeelds  up  himfelf,  when  age  or  ficknejfe  fommon 
him;  yet  he  with  more  alacritie puts  off  his  earth,  when 
the  -brofefsion  of  faith  crownes  him  a  martyr. 


II'' 


Doviiiie  labia  mca  aperies     DAVID. 


Oe  monument  of  me  remaine, 

]My  mem'orie  nifl 
In  the  fame  marble  with  my  dufl : 
"Ere  I  the  fpreadingfl  Laurell  gaine 
By  WTiting  wanton  or  profane. 

Ye  glorious  wonders  of  the  skies, 

Shine  fLiU  bright  flarres, 
Th'  Almighties  myRick  Characters  ! 
He  not  your  beautious  lights  furprife  " 
T'  illuminate  a  womans  eyes. 

Nor  to  perfume  her  veins,  will  I 

In  each  one  fet 
The  purple  of  the  violet. 
The  untoucht  flo\vre  may  grow  and  dye 
Safe  from  my  fancies  injurie. 

Open  my  lippes,  great  God  !  and  then 

He  foare  above 
The  humble  flight  of  camall  love. 
Vpward  to  thee  He  force  my  pen, 
And  trace  no  path  of  vulgar  men. 

For  what  can  our  unbounded  foules 

Worthy  to  be 
Their  object  finde,  excepting  thee? 
Where  can  I  fixe  ?  fmce  time  controules 
Our  pride,  whofe  motion  all  things  roules. 

Should  I  my  felfe  ingratiate  ' 

T'  a  Princes  fmile ; 
How  foone  may  death  my  hopes  beguile  ? 
And  fliould  I  farme  the  proudefl.  flate, 
I'me  Tennant  to  uncertaine  fate. 

If  I  court  gold  ;  will  it  not  rufl  ? 

And  if  my  love 
Toward  a  female  beauty  move  j 


ii6 

How  will  that  furfet  of  our  lufl 
Diftaft  us,  when  refolv'd  to  dufL  ? 

But  thou  ^ternall  banquet !  where 

For  ever  we 
May  feede  without  fatietie  ! 
Who  harmonie  art  to  the  eare, 
Who  art,  while  all  things  elfe  appeare  ! 

While  up  to  thee  1  fhoote  my  flame 

Thou  dofl  difpence 
A  holy  death,  that  murders  fence. 
And  makes  me  fcorne  all  pompes,  that  ayme 
All  other  triumphs  than  thy  name. 

It  crownes  me  with  a  vi6lory 

So  heavenly,  all 
That's  earth  from  me  away  doth  fall. 
And  I,  from  my  corruption  free. 
Grow  in  my  vowes  even  part  of  thee. 

Verfa  ejl  in  hifium  cythara  mea.     I  o  B. 

Ove  !  I  no  orgies  fmg 

Whereby  thy  mercies  to  invoke  : 

Nor  from  the  Eafl  rich  perfumes  bring 

To  cloude  the  Altars  with  thy  precious  fmoake. 

Nor  while  I  did  frequent 
Thofe  fanes  by  lovers  rais'd  to  thee ; 
Did  I  loole  heathenifli  rites  invent, 
To  force  a  blufh  from  injur'd  Chaftitie. 

Religious  was  the  charme 
I  ufed  affe6tion  to  intice  : 

And  thought  none  burnt  more  bright  or  warme, 
Yet  chafle  as  winter  was  the  Sacrifice. 

But  now  I  thee  bequeath 
To  the  foft  filken  youths  at  Court : 
Who  may  t.heir  witty  paffions  breath, 
To  raife  their  Miitreffe  fmile,  or  make  her  fport. 


i 


117 

They'le  fmooth  thee  into  rime, 
Such  as  fhall  catch  the  wanton  eare : 
And  win  opinion  with  the  time, 
To  make  them  a  high  fayle  of  honour  bearc. 

And  may  a  powerfull  fmile 
Cherifti  their  flatteries  of  wit ! 
While  I  my  life  of  fame  beguile 
And  under  my  owne  vine  uncourted  fit. 

For  I  have  feene  the  Pine 
Famed  for  its  travels  ore  the  Sea  : 
Broken  with  flormes  and  age  decline, 
And  in  fome  creeke  unpittied  rot  away. 

I  have  feene  Caedars  fall, 
And  in  their  roome  a  Muflirome  grow  : 
I  have  feene  Comets,  threatning  all, 
Vanifli  themfelves  :  I  have  feene  Princes  fo. 

Vaine  triviall  dufl !  weake  man  ! 
^Vhere  is  that  vertue  of  thy  breath, 
That  others  fave  or  ruine  can. 
When  thou  thy  felfe  art  cal'd  t'account  by  death  ? 

When  I  confider  thee 
The  fcorne  of  Time,  and  fport  of  fate  : 
How  can  I  tume  to  jollitie 
My  ill-flning  Harpe,  and  court  the  delicate  ? 

How  can  I  but  difdaine 
The  emptie  fallacies  of  mirth  ; 
And  in  my  midnight  thoughts  retaine. 
How  high  fo  ere  1  fpread,  my  root's  in  earth? 

Fond  youth  !  too  long  I  playd 
The  wanton  with  a  falfe  delight. 
Which  when  I  toucht,  I  found  a  fliade 
That  onely  wrought  on  th'  error  of  my  fight. 

Then  fmce  pride  doth  betray 
The  foule  to  flatter'd  ignorance  : 
1  from  the  World  will  fteale  away 
And  by  humility  my  thoughts  advance. 


ii8 

Perdam  Sapientiam  Sapientum 

To  the  Right  Honorable  the  Lord  Windfor. 

My  Lord, 

Orgive  my  en  vie  to  the  World  ;  while  I 
Commend  thofefober  thoughts,  perfwade  you  fly 
The  glorious  troubles  of  the  Court.     For  though 
'The  vale  lyes  open  to  each  overflow, 
And  in  the  humble  fliade  we  gather  ill 
And  aguifli  ayres  :  yet  Hghtnings  oftner  kill 
0th'  naked  heights  of  mountaines,  whereon  v/e 
May  have  more  profpedl,  not  fecuritie. 
For  when  with  loffe  of  breath,  we  have  orecome 
Some  fl-eepe  afcent  of  power,  and  forc'd  a  roome 
On  the  fo  envi'd  hill ;  how  doe  our  hearts 
Pant  with  the  labour,  and  how  many  arts 
More  fubtle  mufl:  we  pra6life,  to  defend 
Our  pride  from  Aiding,  then  we  did  t'_  afcend  ? 
How  doth  fucceffe  delude  the  myfl,eries 
And  all  th'  involv'd  defignements  of  the  wife  ? 
How  doth  that  Power,  our  Pollitickes  call  chance, 
Racke  them  till  they  confeffe  the  ignorance 
Of  humane  wit  ?     Which,  when  'tis  fortified 
So  flrong  with  reafon  that  it  doth  deride 
All  adverfe  force  oth'  fudden  findes  its  head 
Intangled  in  a  fpiders  flender  thread. 
Coeleftiall  Providence  !     How  thou  dofl,  mocke 
The  boafl,  of  earthly  wifdome  ?     On  fome  rocke 
When  man  hath  a  ftru6lure,  with  fuch  art, 
It  doth  difdaine  to  tremble  at  the  dart 
Ot  thunder,  or  to  flirinke  oppos'd  by  all 
The  angry  winds,  it  of  it  felfe  doth  fall, 
Ev'n  in  a  calme  fo  gentle  that  no  ay  re 
Breaths  loude  enough  to  fl^irre  a  Virgins  haire  ! 
PiUt  mifery  of  judgement :  Though  pafl,  time 
Iaflru6l  us  by  thrill  fortune  of  their  crimes. 
And  fhew  us  how  we  may  fecure  our  ftate 
From  pittied  ruine,  by  anothers  fate ; 
Yet  we  contemning  all  fuch  fad  advice, 


119 

Purfue  to  build  tliough  on  a  precij^jice. 

But  you  (my  Lord)  prevented  by  forefight 
To  engage  your  felfe  to  fuch  an  unfafe  height, 
And  in  your  felfe  both  great  and  rich  enough 
Refufed  t'expofe  your  velTell  to  the  rough 
Vncertaine  fea  of  bufineffe  :  whence  even  thcv 
Who  make  the  befl  returne,  are  forc't  to  fay: 
The  wealth  we  by  our  worldly  traffique  gaine, 
Weighes  light  if  ballanc'd  with  the  foare  or  paine. 

Pattella  tcni  dicru  m  incoru  in  n  unci  a  in  iJi  i.   DAVID. 

Ell  me  O  great  All  knowing  God  ! 

What  period 
Hafl  thou  unto  my  dayes  affign'd? 
Like  fome  old  leafeleffe  tree,  fliall  I 
Wither  away  :  or  violently 
Fall  by  the  axe,  by  lightning,  or  the  Wihu? 

Heere,  where  I  firfl  drew  vitall  breath 

Shall  I  meete  death  ? 
And  finde  in  the  fame  vault  a  roome 
Where  my  fore-fathers  afhes  fleepe  ? 
Or  fhall  I  dye,  where  none  fliall  weepe 
My  timeleffe  fate,  and  my  cold  earth  intombe? 

Shall  I  'gainfl  the  fwift  Parthians  fight 

And  in  their  flight 
Receive  my  death?     Or  fliall  I  fee 
That  envied  peace,  in  which  we  are 
Triumphant  yet,  difturb'd  by  warre  ; 
And  perifh  by  th'  invading  enemie  ? 

Aflrologers,  who  calculate 

Vncertaine  fate 
Affirme  my  fcheme  doth  not  prefage 
Any  abridgement  of  my  dayes  : 
And  the  Phifitian  gravely  fayes, 
I  may  enjoy  a  reverent  length  of  age. 

But  they  are  jugglers,  and  by  flight 

Of  art  the  fight 
Of  faith  delude  :  and  in  their  fchoole 


120 

They  onely  pra(5life  how  to  make 

A  miftery  of  each  miftake, 

And  teach  flrange  words,  credulity  to  foole. 

For  thou  who  firfl  didfl  motion  give, 

Whereby  things  Kve 
And  Time  hath  being  !  to  conceale 
Future  events  didfl  thinke  it  fit 
To  checke  th'  ambition  of  our  wit, 
And  keepe  in  awe  the  curious  fearch  of  zeale. 

Therefore  fo  I  prepar'd  flill  be. 

My  God  for  thee  : 
0th'  fudden  on  my  fpirits  may 
Some  killing  Apoplexie  feize. 
Or  let  me  by  a  dull  difeafe 
Or  weakened  by  a  feeble  age  decay. 

And  fo  I  in  thy  favour  dye, 

No  memorie 
For  me  a  well-wrought  tombe  prepare, 
For  if  my  foule  be  'mong  the  blefl 

Though  my  poore  afhes  want  a  chefl,  JL 

I  fhall  forgive  the  trefpaffe  of  my  heire.  ^' 

Non  nobis  Domine.     David. 


\ 


O  marble  flatue,  nor  high 
Afpiring  Piramia  be  rays'd 
To  lofe  its  head  within  the  skie  ! 
What  claime  have  I  to  memory  ? 
God  be  thou  onely  prais'd  ! 

Thou  in  a  moment  canfl  defeate 
The  mighty  conquefls  of  the  proude. 
And  blaft  the  laurels  of  the  great. 
Thou  canfl  make  brightefl  glorie  fet 
0th'  fudden  in  a  cloude. 

How  can  the  feeble  workes  of  Art 
Hold  out  'gainfl  the  affault  of  flormes  ? 
Or  how  can  braffe  to  him  impart 
Sence  of  furviving  fame,  whofe  heart 
Is  now  refolv'd  to  wormes  ? 


B 


121 

Blinde  folly  of  triumphing  pride  ! 
i^ternitie  why  buildll  thou  here  ? 
Dofl  thou  not  fee  the  highefl  tide 
Its  humbled  flreame  in  th'  Ocean  hide. 
And  nere  the  fame  appeare  ? 

That  tide  which  did  its  banckes  ore-flow, 
As  fent  abroad  by  the  angry  fea 
To  levell  vafleR  buildings  low, 
And  all  our  Trophies  overthrow; 
Ebbes  like  a  theefe  away. 

And  thou  who  to  preferve  thy  name 
Leav'fl  flatues  in  fome  conquer'd  land ! 
How  will  poflerity  fcome  fame, 
When  th'  Idoll  fhall  receive  a  maime, 
And  loofe  a  foote  or  hand  ? 

How  ^vilt  thou  hate  thy  warres,  when  he 
Who  onely  for  his  hire  did  raife 
Thy  counterfet  in  flone ;  with  thee 
Shall  fland  Competitor  :  and  be 

Perhapes  thought  worthier  praife  ? 

No  Laurell  wreath  about  my  brow  ! 
To  thee,  my  God,  all  praife,  whofe  law 
The  conquer'd  doth  and  conqueror  bow ! 
For  both  dilfolve  to  ayre,  if  thou 

Thy  influence  but  withdraw. 

Solum  mihi  ftiperejl  fepidchriim.     I  O  B. 

Elcome  thou  fafe  retreate  ! 

Where  th'  injured  man  may  fortifie 

Gainfl  the  invafions  of  the  great : 

Where  the  leane  flave,  who  th'  Oare  doth  plye, 

Soft  as  his  Admirall  may  lye. 

Great  Statifl !  tis  your  doome 
Though  your  defignes  fwell  high,  and  wide 
To  be  contra6led  in  a  tombe  ! 
And  all  your  happie  cares  provide 
But  for  your  heire  authorized  pride. 


f 


122 


Nor  flkill  your  fhade  delight 
Ith'  pompe  of  your  proud  obfequies. 
And  fhould  the  prefent  flatterie  write 
A  glorious  Epitaph,  the  wife 
Will  fay,  The  Poets  wit  here  lyes. 

How  reconcil'd  to  fate 
Will  grow  the  aged  Villager, 
When  he  fliall  fee  your  funerall  flate? 
Since  death  will  him  as  warme  inter 
As  you  in  your  gay  fepulcher. 

The  great  decree  of  God 
Makes  every  path  of  mortals  lead 
To  this  darke  common  period. 
For  what  by  wayes  fo  ere  we  tread. 
We  end  our  journey  'mong  the  dead. 

Even  I,  while  humble  zeale 
Makes  fancie  a  fad  truth  indite, 
Infenfible  a  way  doe  fleale  : 
And  when  I'me  loft  in  deaths  cold  nijht, 
Who  will  remember,  now  I  write  ? 

Et  fttgit  velut  umbra.     I  O  B. 
To  the  Right  Honourable  the  Lord  Kiiityre. 

My  Lord 

Hat  fhadow  your  faire  body  made 
So  full  of  fport  it  flill  the  mimick  playde 
Ev'n  as  you  mov'd  and  look'd  but  yeflerday 
So  huge  in  flature ;  Night  hath  flolen  away. 
And  this  is  th'  emblem  of  our  life  :  To  pleafe 
And  flatter  which,  we  fayle  ore  broken  feas 
Vnfaithfull  in  their  rockes  and  tides ;  we  dare 
All  the  ficke  humors  of  a  forraine  ayre. 
And  mine  fo  deepe  in  earth,  as  we  would  trie 
To  unlocke  hell,  fliould  gold  there  hoarded  lie. 
But  when  we  have  built  up  a  asdefice 
T'  outwraftle  Time,  we  have  but  built  on  ice : 
For  firme  however  all  our  flrudlures  be, 
Poliflit  with  fmootheft  Indian  Ivory, 


Rais'd  high  on  marble,  our  unthankfull  hcire 

Will  fcarce  retaine  in  memory,  that  we  were. 

Tracke  through  the  ayre  the  footelleps  of  the  wind, 

And  foarch  the  print  of  fliips  l^Tvl'd  by  ;  then  finde 

Where  all  the  glories  of  thofe  Tvlonarchs  be 

Who  bore  fuch  fway  in  the  worlds  infancie. 

Time  hath  devour'd  them  all :  and  fcarce  can  fame 

Give  an  account,  that  ere  they  had  a  name. 

How  can  he  then  who  doth  the  world  controle 

And  flrikes  a  terror  now  in  either  Pole, 

Th'  infulting  Turke  fecure  himfelf  that  he 

Shall  not  be  lofl  to  dull  Poflerity  ? 

And  though  the  Superflition  of  thofe  Times 

Which  deified  Kings  to  warrant  their  ownc^  crimes 

Tranllated  Caelar  to  a  flarre  ;  yet  they, 

Who  every  Region  of  the  skie  Survay ; 

In  their  Coeleiliail  travaile,  that  bright  coafl 

Could  nere  difcover  which  containes  his  ghofl. 

And  after  death  to  make  that  awe  furvive 

Which  fubje6ls  owe  their  Princes  yet  alive, 

Though  they  build  pallaces  of  braffe  and  jet 

And  keepe  them  living  in  a  counterfet ; 

The  curious  looker  on  foone  paffes  by 

And  findes  the  tombe  a  fickeneffe  to  his  eye. 

Neither  when  once  the  foule  is  gone  doth  all 

The  folemne  triumph  of  the  funerall 

Adde  to  her  glory  or  her  paine  releafe  : 

Then  all  the  pride  of  warre,  and  wealth  of  peace 

For  which  we  toild,  from  us  abflra6led  be 

And  onely  ferve  to  fwell  the  hiflory. 

Thefe  are  fad  thoughts  (my  Lord)  and  fuch  as  iright 
The  eafie  foule  made  tender  with  delight. 
Who  thinkes  that  he  hath  lorfetted  that  houre 
Which  addes  not  to  his  pleafure  or  his  powrc. 
But  by  the  friendfhip  which  your  Lordfhip  daignes 
Your  Servant,  I  have  found  your  judgement  raignes 
Above  all  paffion  in  you  :  and  that  lence 
Could  never  yet  demolifh  that  flrong  fence 
Which  Vertue  guards  yuu  with  :  By  which  you  are 
Triumphant  in  the  befl,  the  inward  warre. 


124 

Nox  no^i  iiidicat  Scientiam.     DAVID. 

Hen  I  furvay  the  bright 
Coelefliall  fpheare : 
So  rich  with  jewels  hung,  that  night 
Doth  hke  an  ^thiop  bride  appeare. 

My  foule  her  wings  doth  fpread 
And  heaven-ward  flies, 
Th'  Almighty's  Myfleries  to  read 
In  the  large  volumes  of  the  skies. 

For  the  bright  firmament 
Shootes  forth  no  flame 
So  filent,  but  is  eloquent 
In  fpeaking  the  Creators  name. 

No  unregarded  flar 

Contra6ls  its  light 
Into  fo  fmall  a  Chara6lar, 
Remov'd  far  from  our  humane  fight : 

But  if  we  fledfafl  looke, 
We  fhall  difcerne 
In  it  as  in  fome  holy  booke, 
How  man  may  heavenly  knowledge  learne. 

It  tells  the  Conqueror, 

That  farre-llretcht  powre 
Which  his  proud  dangers  traffique  for, 
Is  but  the  triumph  of  an  houre. 

That  from  the  fartheft  North ; 
Some  Nation  may 
Yet  undifcovered  iffue  forth. 
And  ore  his  new  got  conquefl  fway. 

Some  Nation  yet  fhut  in 
With  hils  of  ice 
May  be  let  out  to  fcourge  his  finne 
'Till  they  fhall  equall  him  in  vice. 

And  then  they  likewife  fliall 
Their  mine  have. 
For  as  your  felves  your  Empires  fall, 
And  every  Kingdome  hath  a  grave. 


125 

Thus  thofe  Coelefllall  fires, 
Though  feeming  mute 
The  fallacie  of  our  defires 
And  all  the  pride  of  life  confute. 

For  they  have  watcht  fince  firfl 
The  Worid  had  birth  : 
And  found  finne  in  it  felfe  accurfl, 
And  nothing  permanent  on  earth. 

Et  aha  a  loiigk  cognofcit.     D  A  V  I  D. 

\0  the  cold  humble  hermitage 
(Not  tenanted  but  by  difcoloured  age, 
Or  youth  enfeebled  by  long  prayer 
'And  tame  with  fafls)  th'  Almighty  doth  repaire. 

But  from  the  lofty  gilded  roofe 
Stain'd  with  fome  Pagan  fiction,  keepes  a  loofe. 

Nor  the  gay  Landlord  daignes  to  know 
Whofe  buildings  are  like  Monflers  but  for  (how. 

Ambition  !  whither  wilt  thee  climbe, 
Knowing  thy  art,  the  mockery  of  time? 

Which  by  examples  tells  the  high 
Rich  flructures,  they  mufl  as  their  owners  dye  : 

And  while  they  fland,  their  tennants  are 
Detra6lion,  flattry,  wantonneffe,  and  care, 

Pride,  envie,  arrogance,  and  doubt, 
Surfet,  and  eafe  flill  tortured  by  the  gout. 

O  rather  may  I  patient  dwell 
In  th'  injuries  of  an  ill-cover'd  cell ! 

'Gainll  whofe  too  weake  defence  the  haile. 
The  angry  w^nds,  and  frequent  fhowres  prevaile. 

Where  the  fwift  meafures  of  the  day, 
Shall  be  diflinguifht  onely  as  I  pray : 

And  fome  flarres  folitary  light 
Be  the  fole  taper  to  the  tedious  night. 

The  neighbo'ring  fountaine  (not  accurfl 
Like  wine  with  madneffe)  fliall  allay  my  tliirfl : 

And  the  wilde  fruites  of  Nature  give 
Dyet  enough,  to  let  me  feele  I  feele,  I  live. 

You  wantons  !  who  impoverifh  Seas, 


f 


126 

And  th'  ayre  difpeople,  your  proud  tade  to  pleafe  ! 

A  greedy  tyrant  you  obey 
Who  varies  Hill  its  tribute  with  the  day. 

What  intereft  doth  all  the  vaine 
Cunning  of  furfet  to  your  fences  gaine  ? 

Since  it  obfcure  the  Spirit  mufl 
And  bow  the  flefh  to  fleep  difeafe  or  lufl. 

While  who  forgetting  refl  and  fare  ; 
Watcheth  the  fall  and  rifmg  of  each  flarre, 

Ponders  how  bright  the  orbes  doe  move, 
And  thence  how  much  more  bright  the  heav'ns  above 

Where  on  the  heads  of  Cherubins 
Th'  Almightie  fits  difdaining  our  bold  fmnes  : 

Who  while  on  th'  earth  we  groveling  lye 
Dare  in  our  pride  of  building  tempt  the  skie. 

V nivcrfum  Jlli^^itum  ejus  verfajii  i7t  infirmitate 
ejus.      David. 

Y  Soule  !  When  thou  and  I 
Shall  on  our  frighted  death-bed  lye ; 
Each  moment  watching  when  pale  death 
Shall  fnatch  away  our  latefl  breath, 
And  'tweene  two  long  joyn'd  Lovers  force 
An  endleffe  fad  divorce  : 

How  wilt  thou  then  ?  that  art 
My  rationall  and  nobler  part, 
Diftort  thy  thoughts  ?     How  wilt  thou  try 
To  draw  from  weake  Philofophie 
Some  ftrength  :  and  flatter  thy  poor  flr.te, 
'Caufe  tis  the  common  fate  ? 

How  wilt  thy  fpirits  pant 
And  tremble  when  they  feele  the  want 
Of  th'  ufuall  organs  ;  and  that  all 
The  vitall  powers  begin  to  fall  ? 
When  'tis  decreed,  that  thou  mufl  goe, 

Yet  whither ;  who  can  know  ? 

How  fond  and  idle  then 
Will  feeme  the  mifleries  of  men  ? 


127 

How  like  fome  dull  ill-acled  part 
The  fubtlcfl.  of  proud  humane  art  ? 
How  fliallow  ev'n  the  deepefl.  fea, 
When  thus  we  ebbe  away  ? 

But  how  (hall  I  (that  is 
My  fainting  earth)  looke  pale  at  this? 
Disjointed  on  the  racke  of  paine. 
How  fliall  I  murmur,  how  complaine  ; 
And  craving  all  the  ayde  of  skill, 

Finde  none,  but  what  mufl  kill  ? 

Which  way  fo  ere  my  griefe 
Doth  throw  my  fight  to  court  releefe, 
I  fhall  but  meete  defpaire ;  for  all 
Will  prophefie  my  funerall  : 
The  very  filence  of  the  roome 

Will  reprefent  a  tombe. 

And  while  my  Childrens  teares, 
My  Wives  vaine  hopes,  but  certaine  feares, 
And  councells  of  Divines  advance 
Death  in  each  dolefull  circumflance : 
I  fhall  even  a  fad  mourner  be 

At  my  owne  obfequie. 

For  by  examples  I 
Mufl  know  that  others  forrowes  dye 
Soone  as  our  felves,  and  none  furvive 
To  keepe  our  memories  alive. 
Even  our  fals  tombes,  as  loath  to  fay 

We  once  had  life,  decay. 


Latidate  Domijmm  de  coelis.     David. 

Ou  Spirits  !  who  have  thrown e  away 
That  enveous  weight  of  clay 

Which  your  caelefliall  flight  denyed  : 

Who  by  your  glorious  troopes  fupply 
The  winged  Hierarchic, 

So  broken  in  the  Angells  pride  ! 


1 


128 


O  you  !  whom  your  Creators  fight 

Inebriates  with  deUght ! 
Sing  forth  the  triumphs  of  his  name 
All  you  enamord  foules  !  agree  )/ 

In  a  loud  fymphonie  :  j 

To  give  expreffions  to  your  flame  !  ■* 

To  him,  his  owne  great  workes  relate, 

Who  daign'd  to  elevate 
You  'bove  the  frailtie  of  your  birth :  -^ 

Where  you  fland  fafe  from  that  rude  wane,  ■• 

With  which  we  troubled  are 
By  the  rebellion  of  our  earth. 

While  a  corrupted  ayre  beneath 

Here  in  this  World  we  breath 
Each  houre  fome  paffion  us  affailes  : 
Now  lufl  cads  wild-fire  in  the  blood, 

Or  that  it  may  feeme  good, 
It  felfe  in  wit  or  beauty  vailes. 

Then  envie  circles  us  with  hate, 

And  lays  a  fiege  fo  flreight, 
No  heavenly  fuccor  enters  in  : 
But  if  Revenge  admittance  finde, 

For  ever  hath  the  mind 
Made  forfeit  of  it  felfe  to  fmne. 

Affaulted  thus,  how  dare  we  raife 

Our  mindes  to  thinke  his  praife, 
Who  is  ^ternall  and  immens  ? 
How  dare  we  force  our  feeble  wit 

To  fpeake  him  infinite, 
So  farre  above  the  fearch  of  fence  ? 


O  you  !  who  are  immaculate 

His  name  may  celebrate 
In  your  foules  bright  expanfion. 
You  whom  your  vertues  did  unite 

To  his  perpetuall  light. 
That  even  with  him  you  now  fhine  one. 


129 

While  we  who  t'  earth  contra(!:l  our  hearts, 

And  onely  fliidie  Arts 
To  (horten  the  fad  length  of  Time  : 
In  place  of  joyes  bring  humble  feares: 

For  hymnes,  repentant  teares 
And  a  new  figh  for  every  crime. 


Qui  qiiaji  Jios  cgrcditiir. 
To  the  Right  Honourable,  the  Lady  Cat.  T. 


Aire  Madame  !  You 
■i  n^W  ^^^y  ^^^  what's  man  in  yond'  bright  rofe. 
ItV&ij  I  Though  it  the  wealth  of  Nature  owes, 

It  is  opprefl,  and  bends  with  dew. 

Which  fhewes,  though  fate 
May  promife  flill  to  warme  our  lippes, 
And  keepe  our  eyes  from  an  ecclips  ; 
It  will  our  pride  with  teares  abate. 

Poor  filly  flo^\Te  ! 
Though  in  thy  beauty  thou  prefume, 
And  breath  which  doth  the  fpring  perfume  ; 
Thou  may'fl  be  cropt  this  very  houre. 

And  though  it  may 
Then  thy  good  fortune  be,  to  reft 
0th'  pillow  of  fome  Ladies  breft ; 
Thou'lt  whither,  and  be  throwne  away. 

For  'tis  thy  doome 
However,  that  there  fhall  appeare 
No  memory  that  thou  grew'ft  heere. 
Ere  the  tempeftuous  ^vinter  come. 

But  flefh  is  loath 
By  meditation  to  fore  fee 
How  loath'd  a  nothing  it  muft  be: 
Proud  in  the  triumphes  of  its  growth. 


130 

And  tamely  can 
Behold  this  mighty  world  decay 
And  weare  by  th'  age  of  time  away  : 
Yet  not  difcourfe  the  fall  of  man. 

But  Madam  thefe 
Are  thoughts  to  cure  ficke  humane  pride. 
And  med'cines  are  in  vaine  applyed. 
To  bodies  far  'bove  all  difeafe. 

For  you  fo  live 
As  th'  Angels  in  one  perfect  flate ; 
Safe  from  the  mines  of  our  fate, 
By  vertues  great  prefervative. 

And  though  we  fee 
Beautie  enough  to  warme  each  heart ; 
Yet  you  by  a  chafle  Chimicke  Art, 
Calcine  fraile  love  to  pietie. 

Quid  gloriaris  in  malicia  ?     DAVID. 

'  Well  no  more  proud  man,  fo  high  ! 
For  enthron'd  where  ere  you  fit 
iRais'd  by  fortune,  fmne  and  wit : 
^In  a  vault  thou  dufl  mufl  lye. 
He  who's  lifted  up  by  vice 
Hath  a  neighb'ring  precipice 
Dazeling  his  diftorted  eye. 

Shallow  is  that  unfafe  fea 
Over  which  you  fpread  your  faile  : 
And  the  Barke  you  trufl  to,  fraile 
As  the  Winds  it  mufl  obey. 
Mifchiefe,  while  it  profpers,  brings 
Favour  from  the  fmile  of  Kings ; 
Vfeleffe  foone  is  throwne  away. 

Profit,  though  fmne  it  extort. 
Princes  even  accounted  good, 
Courting  greatneffe  nere  withflood, 


131 

Since  It  Empire  doth  fupport. 
But  when  death  makes  them  repent 
They  condemne  the  inftrument, 
And  are  thought  Rehgious  for  't. 

Pitch'd  downe  from  that  height  you  beare, 
How  diflracled  will  you  lye ; 
When  your  flattering  Clients  flye 
As  your  fate  infe6lious  were? 
When  of  all  th'  obfequious  throng 
That  mov'd  by  your  eye  and  tongue, 
None  fliall  in  the  florme  appeare  ? 

When  that  abje(fl  infolence 
(Which  fubmits  to  the  more  great, 
And  difdaines  the  weaker  flate, 
As  misfortune  were  offence) 
Shall  at  Court  be  judged  a  crime 
Though  in  pracSlife,  and  the  Time 
Purchafe  wit  at  your  expence. 

Each  fmall  tempefl  fhakes  the  proud  ; 
Whofe  large  branches  vainely  fprout 
'Bove  the  meafure  of  the  roote. 
But  let  Rormes  fpeake  nere  fo  loud, 
And  th'  aflonifht  day  benight ; 
Yet  the  jufl  fhines  in  a  light 
Faire  as  noone  without  a  cloud. 


Dciis  Deus  Mens.    David. 

Here  is  that  foole  Philofophie, 
That  bedlam  Reafon,  and  that  beall  dull  fence; 
Great  God  !  when  I  confider  thee 
'"Omnipotent,  ^temall,  and  imens  ? 
Vnmov'd  thou  didfl  behold  the  pride 
Of  th'  Angels,  when  they  to  defedlion  fell  ? 

And  without  paffion  didfl  provide 

To  punifh  treafon,  rackes  and  death  in  hell. 

Thy  Word  created  this  great  All, 


132 

Ith'  lower  part  whereof  we  wage  fuch  warres  : 

The  upper  bright  and  fphaericall 
By  purer  bodies  tenanted,  the  flarres. 

And  though  fixe  dayes  it  thee  did  pleafe 
To  build  this  frame,  the  feventh  for  refl  affigne ; 

Yet  was  it  not  thy  paine  or  eafe, 
Eut  to  teach  man  the  quantities  of  Time. 

This  world  fo  mighty  and  fo  faire, 
So  'bove  the  reach  of  all  dimenfion  : 

If  to  thee  God  we  fliould  compare, 
Is  not  the  flenderfl  atome  to  the  Sun. 

What  then  am  I  poore  nothing  man  !    ■ 
That  elevate  my  voyce  and  fpeake  of  thee  ? 

Since  no  imagination  can 
Diflinguifh  part  of  thy  immenfitie  ? 

What  am  I  who  dare  call  thee  God  ! 
And  raife  my  fancie  to  difcourfe  thy  power  ? 

To  whom  dull  is  the  period, 
Who  am  not  fure  to  farme  this  very  houre  ? 

For  how  know  I  the  latefl  fand 
In  my  fraile  glaffe  of  life,  doth  not  now  fall  ? 

And  while  I  thus  afloniflit  fland 
I  but  prepare  for  my  own  funerall  ? 

Death  doth  with  man  no  order  keepe : 
It  reckons  not  by  the  expence  of  yeares. 

But  makes  the  Queene  and  beggar  weepe, 
And  nere  diflinguiflies  betweene  their  teares. 

He  who  the  vi6lory  doth  gaine  ^ 
Falls  as  he  him  purfues,  who  from  him  flyes, 

And  is  by  too  good  fortune  flaine. 
The  Lover  in  his  amorous  courtfhip  dyes. 

The  flates-man  fuddenly  expires 
While  he  for  others  ruine  doth  prepare  : 

And  the  gay  Lady  while  Ih'  admires 
Her  pride,  and  curies  in  wanton  nets  her  haire. 

No  flate  of  man  is  fortified 
*Gaina  the  affault  of  th'  univerfall  doome  : 

But  who  th'  Almightie  feare,  deride 
Pale  death,  and  meete  with  triumph  in  the  tombe. 


^3S 


Qnoiiian  ego  in  JlagcUa  paratus  funi.      DAVID. 

|Ix  me  on  fome  bleake  precipice, 
Where  I  ten  thoufand  yeares  may  (land : 
Made  now  a  flatute  of  ice, 
Then  by  the  fummer  fcorcht  and  tan'd  ! 

Place  me  alone  in  fome  fraile  boate 
'Mid  th'  horrors  of  an  angry  Sea : 
Where  I  while  time  fliall  move,  may  floate 
Defpairing  either  land  or  day  ! 

Or  under  earth  my  youth  confine 
To  th'  night  and  filence  of  a  cell : 
Where  Scorpions  may  my  limbes  entwine. 
O  God  !  So  thou  forgive  me  hell. 

^temitie  !  when  I  think  thee, 
(Which  never  any  end  mufl  have, 
Nor  knew'fl  beginning)  and  fore-fee  ■> 

Hell  is  defign'd  for  {\\\\\q  a  grave. 

IMy  frighted  flefli  trembles  to  dufl, 
My  blood  ebbes  fearefully  away : 
Both  guilty  that  they  did  to  lull. 
And  vanity,  my  youth  betray. 

My  eyes,  which  from  each  beautious  fight 
Drew  Spider-like  blacke  venome  in  : 
Clofe  like  the  marigold  at  night 
Opprefl  with  dew  to  bath  my  fm. 

My  eares  fliut  up  that  eafie  dore 
Which  did  proud  fallacies  admit : 
And  vow  to  heare  no  follies  more ; 
Deafe  to  the  charmes  of  finne  and  wit. 

My  hands  (which  when  they  toucht  fome  faire 
Imagin'd  fuch  an  excellence. 
As  th'  Ermines  skin  ungentle  were) 
Contradl  themfelves,  and  loofe  all  fence. 


134 

But  you  bold  finners  !  flill  purfue 
Your  valiant  wickedneffe,  and  brave 
Th'  Almighty  luflice :  hee'le  fubdue 
And  make  you  cowards  in  the  grave. 

Then  when  he  as  your  judge  appeares, 
In  vaine  you'le  tremble  and  lament. 
And  hope  to  foften  him  with  teares, 
To  no  advantage  penitent. 

Then  will  you  fcorne  thofe  treafures,  which 
So  fiercely  now  you  doate  upon  : 
Then  curfe  thofe  pleafures  did  bewitch 
You  to  this  fad  illufion. 

The  neighb'ring  mountain es  which  you  fhall 
Wooe  to  oppreffe  you  with  their  weight : 
Difdainefull  will  deny  to  fall, 
By  a  fad  death  to  eafe  your  fate. 

In  vaine  fome  midnight  ftorme  at  fea 
To  fwallow  you,  you  will  defire  : 
In  vaine  upon  the  wheels  you'le  pray 
Broken  with  torments  to  expire. 

Death,  at  the  fight  of  which  you  fi,art, 
In  a  mad  fury  then  you'le  Court : 
Yet  hate  th'  expreffions  of  your  heart, 
Which  onely  fhall  be  figh'd  for  fport. 

No  forrow  then  fhall  enter  in 
With  pitty  the  great  judges  eares. 
This  moment's  ours.     Once  dead,  his  fin 
Man  cannot  expiate  with  teares. 

Militia  ejl  vita  hominis. 
To  Sir  Hen.  Per. 


Ere  it  your  appetite  of  glory,  (which 
In  noblefl  times,  did  bravell  foules  bewitch 
To  fall  in  love  with  danger,)  that  now  drawes 
You  to  the  fate  of  warre ;  it  claimes  applaufe  : 


I ; 


And  every  worthy  band  would  pliicke  a  bough 

From  the  bed  fpreading  bay,  to  fliade  your  brow. 

Since  you  unforc'd  part  from  your  Ladies  bed 

^^'arme  with  the  purefl.  love,  to  lay  your  head 

Perhaps  on  fome  rude  turfe,  and  fadly  feele 

The  nights  cold  dampes  wrapt  in  a  flieete  of  ileele. 

You  leave  your  well  grown  woods  ;  and  meadows  which 

Our  Srccnie  doth  with  fruitful!  flreames  enrich. 

Your  woods  where  we  fee  fuch  large  heards  of  Deere 

Your  meades  whereon  fuch  goodly  flockes  appeare. 

You  leave  your  Callle,  fafe  both  for  defence 

And  fweetely  wanton  with  magnificence 

With  all  the  cofl  and  cunning  beautified 

That  addes  to  flate,  where  nothing  wants  but  pride. 

Thefe  charmes  might  have-bin  pow'rful  to  have  Ilaid 

Great  mindes  refolv'd  for  action,  and  betraid 

You  to  a  glorious  eafe :  fince  to  the  warre 

Men  by  defire  of  prey  invited  are. 

Whom  either  finne  or  want  makes  defperate, 

Or  elfe  difdaine  of  their  owne  narrow  fate. 

But  you,  nor  hope  of  fame  or  a  releafe 

Of  the  mofl  fober  goverment  in  peace, 

Did  to  the  hazard  of  the  armie  bring 

Onely  a  pure  devotion  to  the  King 

In  whofe  jufl  caufe  whoever  fights,  mufl  be 

Triumphant  :  fince  even  death  is  vi(flory. 

And  what  is  life,  that  we  to  wither  it 

To  a  weake  wrinckled  age,  fliould  torture  wit 

To  finde  out  Natures  fecrets ;  what  doth  length 

Of  time  deferve,  if  we  want  heate  and  Hrength  ? 

When  a  brave  quarrell  doth  to  arms  provoke 

Why  fhould  we  feare  to  venter  this  thin  fmoke 

This  emptie  fhadow,  life  ?  this  which  the  wife 

As  the  fooles  Idoll,  foberly  defpife  ? 

\\Tiy  fhould  we  not  throw  willingly  away 

A  game  we  cannot  fave,  now  that  we  may 

(jaine  honour  by  the  gift  ?  fince  haply  when 

We  onely  fhall  be  flatue  of  men 

And  our  owne  monuments,  Peace  \vill  deny 


136 

Our  wretched  age  fo  brave  a  caufe  to  dye. 

But  thefe  are  thoughts  !     And  adlion  tis  doth  give 

A  foule  to  courage,  and  make  vertue  live : 

Which  doth  not  dwell  upon  the  valiant  tongue 

Of  bold  Philofophie,  but  in  the  flrong 

Vndaunted  fpirit,  which  encounters  thofe 

Sad  dangers,  we  to  fancie  fcarce  propofe. 

Yet  tis  the  true  and  higheft  fortitude 

To  keepe  our  inward  enemies  fubdued  : 

Not  to  permit  our  paffions  over  fway 

Our  adlions,  not  our  wanton  flefh  betray 

The  foules  chafte  Empire  :  for  however  we 

To  th'  outward  fhew  may  gaine  a  vi6lory 

And  proudly  triumph  :  if  to  conquour  fmne 

We  combate  not,  we  are  at  warre  within. 

Vtas  hias  Domine  demonjira  miki. 

Here  have  I  wandred  ?    In  what  way 

Horrid  as  night 
Increafl  by  llormes  did  I  delight  ? 
Though  my  fad  foule  did  often  fay 
Twas  death  and  madneffe  fo  to  flray. 

On  that  falfe  ground  I  joy'd  to  tread  <' 

Which  feemed  mofl  faire, 
Though  every  path  had  a  new  fnare, 
And  every  turning  flill  did  lead, 
To  the  darke  Region  of  the  dead. 

But  with  the  furfet  of  delight 

I  am  fo  tyred 
That  now  I  loath  what  I  admired, 
And  my  diflafled  appetite 
So  'bhors  the  meate,  it  hates  the  fight. 

For  fhould  we  naked  fmne  difcry 

Not  beautified 
By  th'  ayde  of  wantonneffe  and  pride 
Like  fome  milhapen  birth,  'twould  lye 
A  torment  to  th'  affrighted  eye. 


137 

But  cloath'd  in  beauty  and  refpecfl 

F.ven  ore  the  wife, 
How  powerfull  doth  it  tyrannize  ! 
Whofe  monflrous  Romie  fhould  they  detra(fl 
They  famine  fooner  would  afte6t. 

And  fince  thofe  fhadowes  which  oppreffe 

My  fight  begin 
To  cleere,  and  fhow  the  fhape  of  fmne, 
A  Scorpion  fooner  be  my  guefl, 
And  warme  his  enome  in  my  brefl. 

May  I  before  I  growe  fo  vile 

By  fmne  agen, 
Be  throwne  off  as  a  fcome  to  men  ! 
May  th'  angry  world  decree,  t'  exile 
Me  to  fome  yet  unpeopled  Ifle. 

Where  while  I  flraggle,  and  in  vaine 

Labor  to  finde 
Some  creature  that  fhall  have  a  minde, 
What  juflice  have  I  to  complaine 
If  I  thy  inward  grace  retaine  ? 

My  God  if  thou  fhalt  not  exclude 

Thy  comfort  thence  : 
What  place  can  feeme  to  troubled  fence 
So  melancholly  darke  and  rude, 
To  be  efleem'd  a  folitude. 

Cafl  me  upon  fome  naked  fliore 

Where  I  may  tracke 
Onely  the  print  of  fome  lad  wracke ; 
If  thou  be  there,  though  the  feas  rore, 
I  fhall  no  gentler  calme  implore. 

Should  the  Cym^nerians,  whom  no  ray 

Doth  ere  enlight 
But  gaine  thy  grace,  th*  have  loft  their  night : 
Not  fmners  at  high  noone,  but  they 
*Mong  their  blind  cloudes  have  found  the  day. 


4 


^38 


Et  Exultavit  Hiimiles. 


Ow  cheerefully  th'  unpartiall  Sunne 
Gilds  with  his  beames 
The  narrow  flreames 

0th'  Brooke  which  filently  doth  runne 
Without  a  name  ? 

And  yet  difdaines  to  lend  his  flame 

To  the  wide  channell  of  the  Thames  ? 

The  largefl  raountaines  barren  lye 

And  lightning  feare, 

Though  they  appeare 
To  bid  defiance  to  the  skie ; 

Which  in  one  houre 
W  have  feene  the  opening  earth  devoure 
When  in  their  height  they  proudefl  were. 

But  th'  humble  man  heaves  up  his  head 

Like  fome  rich  vale 

Whofe  fruites  nere  faile 
With  flowres,  with  corne,  and  vines  ore-fpread. 

Nor  doth  complaine 
Oreflowed  by  an  ill  feafon'd  raine 
Or  batter'd  by  a  florme  of  haile. 

Like  a  tall  Barke  with  treafure  fraught 

He  the  feas  cleere 

Doth  quiet  fleere : 
But  when  they  are  t'  a  tempefl  wrought ; 

More  gallantly 
He  fpreads  his  faile,  and  doth  more  high 
By  fwelling  of  the  waves,  appeare. 

For  the  Almighty  joyes  to  force 

The  glorious  tide 

Of  humane  pride 
To  th'  loweft  ebbe ;  that  ore  his  courfe 

(Which  rudely  bore 


CI 


139 

Downe  what  oppos'd  it  heretofore) 
His  feeblefl  enemie  may  flride. 

But  from  his  ill-thatcht  roofe  he  brings 

The  Cottager 

And  doth  preferre 
Him  to  th'  adored  date  of  Kings  : 

He  bids  that  hand 
Which  labour  hath  made  rough  and  tand 
The  all  commanding  Scepter  beare. 

Let  then  the  mighty  ccafe  to  boafl 

Their  boundleffe  fway : 

Since  in  their  Sea 
Few  fayle,  but  by  fome  florme  are  lofl. 

Let  them  themfelves 
Beware,  for  they  are  their  owne  fhelves. 
Man  (lill  himfelfe  hath  cafl  away. 


Domimis  Do minantmm. 

jVpreame  Divinitie  !     Who  yet 

Coulde  ever  finde 
By  the  bold  fcrutinie  of  wit, 
"The  treafurie  where  thou  lock'n,  up  the  wind? 

What  Majefly  of  Princes  can 

A  tempefl  awe; 
When  the  diflracled  Ocean 
Swells  to  Sedition,  and  obeyes  no  Law  ? 

How  wTetched  doth  the  Tyrant  fland 

Without  a  boafl  ? 
When  his  rich  fleete  even  touching  land 
He  by  fome  florme  in  his  owne  Port  fees  lufl  ? 

Vaine  pompe  of  life  !  what  narrow  bound 

Ambition 
Is  circled  with  ?     How  falfe  a  ground 
Hath  humane  pride  to  build  its  triumphs  on. 


I40 

\nd  Nature  how  dofl  thou  delude 

Our  fearch  to  know  ? 
When  the  fame  windes  which  here  intrude 
On  us  with  frofls  and  onely  winter  blow  : 

Breath  temprate  on  th'  adjoyning  earth; 

And  gently  bring 
To  the  glad  field  a  fruitfull  birth 
With  all  the  treafures  of  a  wanton  Spring. 

How  diverfly  death  doth  affaile ; 

How  fporting  kill  ? 
While  one  is  fcorcht  up  in  the  vale 
The  other  is  congeald  oth'  neighboring  hill. 

While  he  with  heates  doth  dying  glow 

Above  he  fees 
The  other  hedg'd  in  with  his  fnow 
And  envies  him  his  ice  although  he  freeze. 

Proud  folly  of  pretending  Art, 

Be  ever  dumbe, 
And  humble  thy  afpiring  heart, 
When  thou  findefl  glorious  Reafon  overcome. 

And  you  AfLrologers,  whofe  eye 

Survayes  the  flarres  ! 
And  offer  thence  to  prophefie 
Succeffe  in  peace,  and  the  event  of  warres. 

Throw  downe  your  eyes  upon  that  duft 

You  proudly  tread  ! 
And  know  to  that  refolve  you  mud  ! 
That  is  the  fcheme  where  all  their  fate  may  read. 


Cogitabo  pro  peccato  meo. 

N  what  darke  filent  grove 
Profan'd  by  no  unholy  love. 
Where  witty  melancholy  nere 
Did  carve  the  trees  or  wound  the  ayre, 
Shall  I  religious  leafure  winne 
To  weepe  away  my  fmne  ? 


141 

How  fondly  have  I  fpent 
My  youthes  unvalued  treafure,  lent 
To  trafiique  for  Ccelefliall  joyes? 
My  unripe  yeares  purfuing  toyes  ; 
Judging  things  befl  that  were  mofl  gay 

Fled  unobferv'd  away. 

Gro^^Tle  elder  I  admired 
Our  Poets  as  from  heaven  infpired 
What  Obeliskes  decreed  I  fit 
For  Spencers  Art,  and  Sydnyes  wit  ? 
But  waxing  fober  foone  I  found 

Fame  but  an  Idle  found. 

Then  I  my  blood  obey'd 
And  each  bright  face  an  Idoll  made  : 
Verfe  in  an  humble  Sacrifice, 
I  olTer'd  to  my  Mi  fire  ffe  eyes, 
But  I  no  fooner  grace  did  win 

But  met  the  devill  within. 

But  growne  more  polliticke 
I  tooke  account  of  each  flate  tricke  : 
Obferv'd  each  motion,  judg'd  him  wife, 
Who  had  a  confcience  fit  to  rife. 
Whome  foone  I  found  but  forme  and  rule 

And  the  more  ferious  foole. 

But  now  my  foule  prepare 
To  ponder  what  and  where  we  are 
How  fraile  is  life,  how  vaine  a  breath 
Opinion,  how  uncertaine  death  : 
How  onely  a  poore  flone  fliall  beare 

Witnefle  that  once  we  were. 

How  a  fhrill  Trumpet  Ihall 
Vs  to  the  barre  as  tray  tors  call. 
Then  fhall  we  fee  too  late  that  pride 
Hath  hope  with  flattery  bely'd 
And  that  the  mighty  in  command 

Pale  Cowards  there  mufl  fland. 


142 

Rccogitabo  tibi  omnes  annos  meos.      I  s  A  Y. 
Ime  !  where  didft  thou  thofe  years  inter 

Which  I  have  feene  deceafe  ? 
My  foules  at  war  and  truth  bids  her 
Finde  out  their  hidden  Sepulcher, 
To  give  her  troubles  peace. 
Pregnant  with  flowers  doth  not  the  Spring 

Like  a  late  bride  appeare? 
VVhofe  fether'd  Muficke  onely  bring 
Careffes,  and  no  Requiem  fing 

On  the  departed  yeare  ? 
The  Earth,  like  fome  rich  wanton  heire, 

VVhofe  Parents  cofiin'd  lye, 
Forgets  it  once  lookt  pale  and  bare 
And  doth  for  vanities  prepare. 

As  the  Spring  nere  fhould  dye. 
The  prefent  houre,  flattered  by  all 

Reflects  not  on  the  lafl ; 
But  I,  like  a  fad  fador  fhall 
T'  account  my  life  each  moment  call, 
And  onely  weepe  the  pafl:. 

My  mem'ry  trackes  each  feverall  way 

Since  Reafon  did  begin 
Over  my  adions  her  firfl:  fway  : 
And  teacheth  me  that  each  new  day 

Did  onely  vary  fin. 

Poor  banckrout  Confcience  !  where  are  thofe 

Rich  houres  but  farm'd  to  thee  ? 
How  careleffely  I  fome  did  lofe. 
And  other  to  my  luft  difpofe 

As  no  rent  day  fhould  be  ? 
I  have  infe6ted  with  impure 

Diforders  my  pafl,  yeares. 
But  He  to  penitence  inure 
Thofe  that  fucceed.     There  is  no  cuie 

Nor  Antidote  but  teares. 


143 


Ciipio  diffolvi     P  A  V  L  E. 

^Ile  foule  which  doth  with  God  unite, 
hofe  gayities  how  doth  flie  flight 

VVhich  ore  opinion  fway  ? 
Like  facred  Virgin  wax,  which  ihines 
On  Altars  or  on  Martyrs  fhrines 

How  doth  Ihe  burne  away  ? 

How  violent  are  her  throwes  till  flie 
From  envious  earth  delivered  be, 

Which  doth  her  flight  reflraine  ? 
How  doth  fhe  doate  on  whips  and  rackes, 
On  fires  and  the  fo  dreaded  Axe, 

And  every  murd'ring  paine  ? 

How  foone  fhe  leaves  the  pride  of  wealth. 
The  flatteries  of  youth  and  health 

And  fames  more  precious  breath. 
And  every  gaudy  circumRance 
That  doth  the  pompe  of  life  advance 

At  the  approach  of  death  ? 

The  cunning  of  Aflrologers 
Obferves  each  motion  of  the  flarres 

Placing  all  knowledge  there  : 
And  Lovers  in  their  Miflreffe  eyes 
Contra6l  thofe  wonders  of  thexskies, 

And  feeke  no  higher  fphere. 

The  wandring  Pilot  fweates  to  find 
The  caufes  that  produce  the  wind 

Still  gazing  on  the  Pole. 
The  Politician  fcornes  all  Art 
But  what  doth  pride  and  power  impart. 

And  fwells  the  ambitious  foulc. 


144 

But  he  whom  heavenly  fire  doth  warme, 
Amd  'gainfl.  thefe  powerful  follies  arme, 

Doth  foberly  difdaine 
All  thefe  fond  humane  miseries 
As  the  deceitfuU  and  unwife 

Diilempers  of  our  braine. 

He  as  a  burden  beares  his  clay, 
Yet  vainely  throwes  it  not  away 

On  every  idle  caufe  : 
But  with  the  fame  untroubled  eye 
Can  refolve  to  live  or  dye, 

Regardleffe  of  th'  applaufe. 

My  God  !     If  'tis  thy  great  decree 
That  this  muft  the  lafl  moment  be 

Wherein  I  breath  this  ayre ; 
My  heart  obeyes  joy'd  to  retreate 
From  the  falfe  favours  of  the  great 

And  treachery  of  the  faire. 

When  thou  Ihalt  pleafe  this  foule  t'  enthrone, 
Above  impure  corruption ; 

What  fhall  I  grieve  or  feare. 
To  thinke  this  breathleffe  body  muft 
Become  a  loathfome  heape  of  duft 

And  nere  againe  appeare. 

For  in  the  fire  when  Ore  is  tryed, 
And  by  that  torment  purified  : 
Doe  we  deplore  the  loffe? 
And  when  thou  Ihalt  my  foule  refine, 
That  it  thereby  may  purer  fhme 
Shall  I  grieve  for  the  droffe? 


I 


FINIS. 


Mmr&'Pntersst.  PrinUrs,  Bdinbursh. 


0 


t 


^ 


PR 

2295 
E7 

1870 


James  I 

The  ess  ys  of  a  prentise 


aUo    Uj<k/K  T  P«<  --s  .-^^^ 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 


UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


