A MIDDLE ENGLISH READER 




MACMILLAN AND CO., Limited 

LONDON , BOMBAY . CALCUTTA . MADRAS 
MELBOURNE 

TPIE MACMILLAN COMPANY 

NEW YORK . BOSTON . CHICAGO 
DALLAS . SAN FRANCISCO 

THE MACMILLAN CO. OF CANADA, Ltd. 

TORONTO 


A MIDDLE ENGLISH 
READER 


EDITED, WITH GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 
NOTES, AND GLOSSARY 

BY 

OLIVER FARRAR EMERSON, A.M., Pll.D. 

PROFESSOR OF ENGLISH 
IN WESTERN RESERVE UNIVERSITY 


NEW AND REVISED EDITION 


MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED 
ST. MARTIN’S STREET, LONDON 
1924 



COPYRIGHT. 


First Edition^ 1905. 

Reprinted 1908, 1909, 1912. 

New and Revised Edition, 1915; Reprinted 1916, 1919, 1921, 1923, 1924. 


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN. 



PREFACE 


This Reader is intended to serve as an introduction to the 
language and literature of the period concisely called Middle 
English, that is the centuries between iioo and 1500. It consists 
of a Grammatical Introduction based on lectures to students begin- 
ning the study of Middle English ; selections arranged on the basis 
of the great dialectal divisions of the language during the period, 
and accompanied by explanatory Notes ; a Glossary which, in addi- 
tion to the necessary general information of a lexicon, accounts for 
the forms of words on the basis of dialectal differences in Old and 
Middle English. 

The arrangement of the book on the basis of a single dialect 
has seemed to be justified by the writer's experience with students 
during the last ten years* Whatever book has been used,, the 
student has been first introduced to those selections best illustrating 
the chronological development of a single dialect, as the Midland, 
and only then to each of the others, with direct relation always to 
the one already mastered. This has not failed to insure a fairly 
accurate knowledge of the main features of each division of the 
language, rather than a confused conception of linguistic forms 
such as often results from reading selections without regard to 
dialectal differences, This method, it wdll be seen, is but follow- 
ing the best practice in reading Old English, or Anglo-Saxon. 
Indeed, the great advance in the latter study may be dated from 
the time when a grammar was prepared on the basis of texts repre- 
senting a single dialect, West Saxon, in its purity, rather than 
a mixture of dialectal forms such as much Old English literature 
presents. The plan of Old English study, therefore, as well as 
experience in teaching, seems to justify some such arrangement as 
the present. The emphasis of the Midland dialect is owing to its 
fundamental importance in linguistic and literary history. Since 
Midland became the l^guage of the most important literature as 
early as the middle of the fourteenth century, and the foundation 

the standard language of modem times, it is that dialect which is 
most important to the student of both language and literature for 
at least ^ix centuries. Besides, the apparent continuity of Southern 



vi 


PREFACE 


English in its relation to West Saxon is apparent rather than real 
in any important sense. So thoroughly is the continuity broken by 
important phonetic and orthographic changes, wide-spread leveling 
of inflexions, and considerable differences in syntax, that it affords 
no decided advantage over Midland, even to the student fresh from 
Old English study. In any case the change to Midland must be 
made not later than the middle of the fourteenth century, and the 
student must then be led back to the beginnings of Midland Eng- 
lish, in order fully to understand the language of Chaucer and those 
who follow him. There seems, therefore, no special advantage in 
emphasizing the Southern dialect as the descendant of West 
Saxon, though this may be done even with the present book if 
desired. 

It is believed that a sufflcient number of texts have been given, 
to represent adequately for the beginner each great dialectal divi- 
sion of the language. Kentish has been given least space, and is 
not separated from the rest of Southern English. This is owing 
partly to the limitations of an introductory book, partly to^ the 
relatively unimportant place of that dialect in both Old and Middle 
English. The Kentish selections chosen could be easily grouped 
together, however, and special emphasis of Kentish peculiarities 
will be found in the Notes upon them. On the other hand, the 
dialect of London is especially represented in order to illustrate the 
change from Southern to Midland, so important in relation not 
only to the language of Chaucer but also to Modern English. 
Owing, also, to necessary limitations of a single handbook texts from 
writers of the fifteenth century have not been used. To that 
century little introduction is necessary apart from such study of 
the earlier period as this book will permit. 

As to the selections themselves, the purpose has been to present 
texts representing the dialects in their purity, together with as much 
of interest as is compatible with the first and most important con- 
sideration. Comparison with such lists as those by Morsbach, 

" Mittelenglische Grammatik,* pp. 7-1 1, will show how fully this 
has been done. In fact, except for two or three selections from 
poetical romances, chosen on the score of interest along with a fair 
degree of purity, all texts may be relied upon as typical of the time 
and region to which they belong. When possible, texts or selec- 
tions not found in other books have been used, so as to furnish 
a greater variety within the reach of student and teacher. In all 
cases the selections are of sufficient length to afford a fairly com- 



PREFACE 


vii 


prehensive view of the author or period. Partly because they 
would not be typical, partly owing to mixture of dialectal forms, 
some short pieces which might have been included on the score of 
interest have been omitted. 

For each selection, the best manuscript from the standpoint of 
linguistic purity has always been followed. This is now more 
easily possible owing to the great number of well -edited texts acces- 
sible in printed form, but the manuscripts themselves have been 
examined when necessary to secure linguistic purity. It has not 
been thought necessary, however, to burden the pages of an intro- 
ductory book with readings from less important texts, though 
references to these sometimes occur in the Notes. Finally, the 
selections chosen have been reproduced in their integrity in all 
essential particulars. Yet this does not mean that a mediaeval 
punctuation has been preserved, or an irregular and meaningless 
use of capitals. To retain these, as has sometimes been done in 
beginners' books, is but lo confuse the student without any 
measurable advantage. The footnotes give references to abbre- 
viations expanded with regard to the forms of the particular 
dialect, and to manuscript readings not given in the text. These 
are usually errors of a careless scribe, or readings in which emenda- 
tion seemed necessary. Regularization of orthography has not 
been attempted in general, but in the Midland selections, as those 
which will usually be first read, some slight assistance of this sort 
has been offered the beginner. All such forms, however, have 
been indicated in footnotes, so that they cannot mislead if they do 
not assist. 

The Notes on each selection give such information as is known 
regarding the manuscript, its date, author, place of composition, 
and some account of the work from which the extract is made. 
This is followed by explanations of points in grammar, history, life 
of the times, and similar subjects when necessary. In all cases, 
use is made of critical articles in the various scholarly journals, and 
references are given to assist the student in independent examination 
when desirable. 

The Glossary has been prepared on the basis of the Midland 
dialect, from which the greater number of selections have been 
made, but with inclusion in alphabetical order of all words not 
found in the Midland selections, and cross-references when neces- 
sary to the forms of other dialects*. In the matter of cross-refer- 
ences, as in arrangement within the alphabet, the needs of die 



PREFACE 


vm 

beginner have always been regarded as the most important in an 
introductory book. Thus the strictest alphabetic arrangement has 
been chosen in all cases. The ligature cb , though a simple sound 
rather than a diphthong at any time, has been placed after ad 
because the beginner will more easily find it there. He may then 
easily learn its real value, as he must in most other cases in w'hich 
alphabetic arrangement gives no certain clue. ^ 

A word as to the Grammatical Introduction may not be out 
of place. In the incomplete state of the exhaustive treatment 
of Middle English grammar proposed by Morsbach, it w^ould be 
impossible to expect so accurate a summary as may in future be 
written. The task was simpler, however, than it might seem. It 
was to present in systematic order the main grammatical facts of 
the Midland dialect, with such notes as would make possible an 
intelligent reading of the literature in the remaining divisions of the 
language. It need not be said that the writer is grateful, as all 
must be, for the part of Morsbach’s grammar which has appeared 
He has also made use of most special studies of the period, or of 
particular works, so far as they W’ere important for the book in 
hand. But the arrangement of material is based upon the writer’s 
presentation of the subject to students for some years. 

The book is intended for those who have had some introduction 
to the study of Old English. This will be seen from the numerous 
references to Old English grammar, and to grammatical forms of 
the older period. It is needless to say that no minutely careful 
study of Middle English is possible without a fundamental know- 
ledge of the earlier period. On the other hand, a reading know- 
ledge of Middle English literature is easily possible with even a 
moderate attention to grammatical relationships, and it is hoped 
that the book may be of use to those w’ho have not begun with the 
more fundamental study of earlier English. 

It is impossible here to give credit to all books and monographs 
used in the preparation of the Reader. Mention in Introduction 
or Notes of articles and commentators is intended to imply grateful 
acknowledgement of indebtedness. Failure to mention others does 
not imply that the writer has not used them so far as seemed wise. 
Certainly it has been his purpose to weigh and consider p-mctically 
all of the literature of the subject up to the time of gomg to press. 


OoF.Eo 


Clbvelakd, Aj/fril 15, 1904. 



CONTENTS 


PAGE 

GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION . c . , . xiii 

The Language and the Dialects . , . o xiii 

Orthography and Pronunciation . . . , xviii 

Phonology ........ c xxv 

Inflexions Ixxviii 

Syntax cxix 


PART I 

THE MIDLAND DIALECT 

Early East Midland 

I. The Peterborough Chronicle I 

11 . The Dedication to the ‘ Ormulum ’ . • , » 8 

3. Midland of the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Cen- 
turies 

I. ‘The Bestiary’ . . o o o . . . 14 

IL ‘The Story of Joseph’ 21 

III. ‘ Floris and Blauncheflur ’ • o .... 35 

IV. ‘ The Debate of the Body and the Soul * ... 47 

V. ‘ Adam and Eve ’ . , , v . . . . 64 

VI. ‘ Havelok the Dane ’ ....... 75 

VII. Robert Manning’s ‘ Handlynge Synne* — The Tale of 

Pers the Usurer ....... 88 

VI I L The West Midland Prose Psalter . . . . ,100 

IX. ^ The Earl of Toulouse’ 105 

X Gild of the Holy Trinity and of Saint William of 

Norwich n6 

XI. John Myrc’s ‘Instructions for Parish Priests’ . .119 



CONTEmS 


s 

PART II 

THE DIALECTS OF THE NORTH, THE SOUTH, 


AND THE CITE OF LONDON 

A. The Northern Dialect 

1 . Prologue to the ' Cursor Mundi ’ 126 

11. ^ The Death of Saint Andrew’ 135 

III. Treatises of Richard Rolle of Hampole . . .143 

IV. A Metrical Homily— The Signs of the Doom . . 148 

V. The Songs of Lawrence Minot 157 

VI. Barbour’s ' Bruce*— The Pursuit of King Robert . . 166 

B. The Southern Dialect, Including Kentish 

I. ‘ The Poema Morale, or Moral Ode ’ . . . .176 

II. Layamon’s ^ Brut’— Arthur’s Last Battle . , .181 

III. ‘The Life of Saint Juliana’ ...... 191 

IV. ® The Ancren Riwle, or Rule of Nuns’ . . . .197 

V. Robert of Gloucester’s 'Chronicle’— How the Normans 

came to England 203 

VI. Old Kentish Sermons 210 


VII.' The Ayenbite of Inwit, or Remorse of Conscience ’ .215 

VIII. Trevisa’s Translation of Higden’s ' Polychronicon ’ . 220 


C. The Dialect of London 

1 . The English Proclamation of Henry III . . . 226 

II. Adam Davy’s 'Dreams about Edward IT . . . 227 

III. The First Petition to Parliament in English . , .232 

IV. Chaucer’s ' Canterbury Tales ’ — The Tale of the Par- 

doner 237 

NOTES ........ c .. 247 

GLOSSARY 319 



ABBREVIATIONS! 


AF, Anglo-French. 

AN, Anglo-Norman, 

Ang, Anglian. 
cogn. Cognate. 

EETS, Early English Text 
Society. 

eME, Early Middle English. 
EML East Midland. 
eMl. Early Midland. 
eSth, Early Southern. 

Goth, Gothic. 

IcL Icelandic. 
tnfl. Influenced by. 

Kt, Kentish. 

Lat, Latin. 

LG, Low German. 

LL, Low Latin. 

IME, Late Middle English. 

I Nth, Late Northern. 

10 E, Late Old English. 

IWS, Late West Saxon. 

MDu, Middle Dutch. 

ME, Middle English. 

Merc, Mercian. 

MHG, Middle High German. 

Ml, Midland, 


MLat, Middle Lat. 

MLG, Middle Low German. 
MnE, Modem English. 

N,E.D, New English Dictionar}\ 
NEML Northeast Midland. 

NF, Norman French. 

Nth, Northern. 

NWML Northwest Midland, 
OAng.^ Old Anglian. 

ODan, Old Danish. 

OE, Old English (Anglo-Saxon). 

OF, Old French. 

OFris, Old Frisian. 

OIr, Old Irish. 

OKt, Old Kentish. 

OM, Old Mercian. 

ON, Old Norse. 

ONth, Old Northern, Northum- 
brian. 

OSw, Old Swedish. 

SEMI. Southeast Midland. 

Sth, Southern. 

Teut, Teutonic, General Teutonic. 
WMl, West Midland. 

WS, West Saxon. 

< From, or derived from. 


^ The ordinary grammatical abbreviations are not included, since well- 
known or easily understood. Special abbreviations used in the glossarj^, 
together with a few diacritics, will be found in the note preceding that division 
of the book. 

“ Does not differ fiom Anglian, the dialect of the Anglian territory in Old 
English times. So Mercian and Old Mercian are the same. 




GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 

THE LANGUAGE AND THE DIALECTS 

1. By Middle English is meant that form of the language used 
in England between the years iioo and 1500, that is English of 
the twelfth, thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth centuries. At the 
first date, the language shows such considerable differences from. 
Old English (Anglo-Saxon) as to warrant a new name. By the 
last date, all essential elements of Modern English had come into 
existence. 

2. Middle English is not so homogeneous in form during the 
whole period as the Old English of literature (mainly West Saxon) 
on the one side, or as Modern English on the other. It is most 
homogeneous for the Midland dialect, with which this introduction 
especially deals, between 1200 and 1400, or normal Middle English 
as it will be considered. From 1100 to 1200, known as early 
Middle English, the language shows less of regularity, owing to 
more rapid changes from Old English, and to the gradual absorp-r 
lion of new elements in the vocabulary, as of Danish and French 
words. Besides, the scribes of this period were largely influenced 
by the traditional orthography and grammar of the language, so 
that literature of this time was largely a copy, with slight variations, 
of that properly belonging before 1 100. From 1400 to 1 ^ 00 , late 
Middle English, the language was more rapidly approaching its 
modern form. This introduction, therefore, deals with Middle 
English proper, with notes on early and late forms, and on the 
different dialects. 

NbTE I.— Scholars differ somewhat as to the divi^ons of the ME. penod. 
Sweet, ' History of English Sounds/ p. 154, makes the periods 1050 to 1150, 
ji|0 tp 1450J 1450 to 1500; Morsbach, * Mittelenglische Grammatik/ p. ir, 



xiv 


GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


gives the dates iico to 1250, 1250 to 1400, 1400 to 1500. As changes in 
language are always gradual, exclusive divisions are naturally impossible. 
Besides, chronological divisions must differ somewhat when different dialects are 
taken as the basis, the language of the South being much more conservative 
than that of the Midland or the North. For the South, the date 1250 is none 
too late to close the first period, and early Southern, in notes on the dialects, 
will include the years 1100 to 1250. For the other districts the date 1200 is 
late enough for all practical purposes, so that early Midland and early Northern 
will comprise the twelfth century, 1100 to 1200. 

3, Some characteristics of Middle English, as compared with 
Old English, may be briefly summarized. Middle English phono- 
logy shows a reduction to simple sounds of all OE. diphthongs, 
and the formation of new diphthongs; widely-spread changes in 
quantity of both long and short vowels ; and the loss of the 
consonant li in OE. initial combinations hl^ hn^ and hr. The 
vocabulary shows large additions of foreign words, especially 
Danish and French. The inflexions show a far-reaching leveling, 
and later a loss of older inflexional endings. Finally, the syntax 
is characterized by a marked tendency to a fixed order of words, 
and by larger use of connective words to perform the functions 
of the lost inflexions, as prepositions to join nouns and pronouns 
to other elements, and of verbal auxiliaries to effect unions of 
verbal elements. 

4. Middle English embraces the great dialect divisions. Southern, 
Midland, and Northern, corresponding in general to Southern, 
Mercian, and Northumbrian of the OE. period. Northern, how- 
ever, extended beyond the region of the older Northumbrian to 
the Lowlands of Scotland on the north, to the. north .half of 
Lancashire on the west, and probably to parts of Nottinghamshire 
and Lincolnshire on the south. - Southern included, as rin Old 
English, Kent and the region south and west of the Thames, with 
Gloucestershire and parts of Hereford and Worcestershire. Mid- 
land embraces the region between Northern and SDUihcrn from 
Wales to the North Sea. Southern and Midland are again divided 
into east and west divisions. The eastern division of Southern 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION xv 

includes Kent and a small part of the old West Saxon district; 
the western division all the remainder of Southern as already 
described. West Midland is bounded by Wales on the west, and 
the Danelaw on the east. East Midland includes the larger part 
of the older Mercia, together with East Anglia, Essex, and Middle- 
sex. As the East Midland district contained the city of London, 
the center of national life from the middle of the twelfth century, 
the language of this division gradually became most important 
in the history of English, and formed the basis of the modern 
language of standard speech and of literature. For this reason, 
selections from East Midland are placed first in this book, and 
upon it this introduction is based. Unless otherwise stated, there- 
fore, Middle English, as used in this book, will mean the Midland 
(mainly East Midland) dialect. 

Note i. — West Midland, in its purer examples, differs so slightly from East 
Midland, and is so scantily represented by texts nninfluenced by Southern on 
one side or Northern on the other, that it has been but sparingly represented. 

Note 2. — The language of London, the seat of government after the beginning 
of Henry the Second’s reign (1154), was largely Southern during the earlier 
part of the ME. period, as shown by the proclamation of Henry III in 1258 
(see p. 226). It gradually lost its Southern character however, until, toward 
the end of the fourteenth century, it was essentially Midland. The importance 
of London English, in relation to the development of the literary language, 
has suggested devoting to it several special selections. 

5. The differences between the different dialects will be best 
understood by a study of phonology and of inflexions in the 
following pages. Some of the more characteristic differences may 
be given here, especially of Midland with which we have most to 
do. Midland English, like Northern, is based on Old Anglian, and 
shows forms due to OAng. phonology and inflexion as compared 
with West Saxon. See Sievers, ' Angelsachsische Grammatik'^ 
(Sievers-Cook, 'Grammar of Old English’), §§ 150-168, and notes 
under inflexions, as well as notes under § 16 f. of this Introduction, 
The most marked phonological differences between Old Anglian 


^ All references are to the third edition, and translation of Same. 



rvi 


GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


and West Saxon are the lengthening of OE. a before Id, the re- 
tention of Teutonic ^ as a close sound (WS. ; the monophthong- 
ing of Teutonic au, eu (WS. ea, eo) to e before c, h, g ; and the 
appearance of e for WS. and for WS. the mutation of fa, ea. 
Owing to these OAng. peculiarities, Midland English has g for 
OAng. d before Id, as for OE. d in other situations, together with 
a far greater number of close e sounds tlian Southern. Otherwise 
the clearest idea of Midland English may be gained by a clear 
separation from it of Northern and Southern dialects. Phono- 
logically, Northern is distinguished by retention of OE. d (OAng. d 
before Id also) as d', by the guttural quality of k, g sounds; by the 
use of qufipd) for OE. hw, when beginning a word or syllable ; and 
by i- for OE. sc in unstressed words and syllables, as sal ‘ shall,’ 
Inglis ‘ English.’ Southern is clearly marked by the retention of 
the quality of OE.j/ sounds (< u, less commonly IWS. re- 
presenting them by u {ui) under the influence of OF. orthography; 
and by the tendency of OE.y; .f, kw, to become v, z, w, voiced 

initially and when following an unstressed prefix. The last 
consonantal changes, especially of s to v, z, are more fully re- 
presented in Kentish than in southwest Southern. Otherwise 
Kentish is distinguished by the use of e for OE. p, as in Old 
Kentish. 

6. As to inflexion, by the last of the thirteenth century Northern 
had reduced almost all nouns to a single inflexional form, based 
on OE. strong masculines, and had completely leveled most in- 
flexions of adjectives and adjective pronouns. The two preterit 
stems of OE. strong verbs had commonly been reduced to one, 
usually the singular. The OE. prefix whether of past participles 
or other parts of verbs, had been wholly lost. Final unstressed e 
was no longer pronounced after the middle of the fourteenth 
century. On the other hand, Southern is distinguished by retaining 
the weak en plurals of nouns, and even by extending that ending in 
some cases ; also by the retention of a larger number of inflexional 
forms of adjectives and adjective pronouns, and of te[n), ie, leS in 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 2tvii 

infinitive and present tense of OE. weak verbs of the second 
class ; by the preservation of final unstressed in general, through 
the fourteenth century. In these particulars the IMidland dialect 
agrees more commonly with Northern than with Southern, though 
southeast Midland agrees with Southern in many cases. The most 
distinctive mark of inflexion in the three dialects is that of the 
present indicative of verbs, the inflexional endings of which are as 
follows : — 

Nth. Sg. I. {e) or esi 2. es : 3. es, PL i, 2, 3, es, or<?L 
ML i.e: 2.esf: 3. later <?. 

Sth. I. e, (ley: 2. {e)sl: 3. {e)p{th) „ {lej>)% etk{lelhf. 

In addition. Northern is also peculiar in the use of the ending 
a7id{e) in the present participle, the usual loss of personal endings 
in the w^eak preterit, and the reduction of the two preterit stems in 
strong verbs to one, generally the singular. Midland and Southern 
agree in general in retaining the personal endings of weak preterits, 
and both preterit stems of strong verbs, while in the present 
participle Midland uses the ending end{e\ later ingef seldom and{e)^ 
and Southern inde^ later inge^ seldom ende. 

Note. — For a fuller statement of dialectal differences, see Morsbach, 
* Miltelenglische Grammatik,' pp. 11--14; Kaluza, ‘Historische Grammatikder 
englischen Sprache,’ § 17, 204. Naturally not all works written in Middle 
English are equally valuable for the study of the language. Especially 
popular works, which were frequently copied, show a mixture in orthography 
as well as in dialect, owing to changes by different scribes. The purest texts 
are of course necessary to an understanding of the language as it actually 
existed, and from these most of the selections for this book have been made. 
For fuller lists of pure texts representing the different dialects, see Morsbach, 
as above, pp. 4-11, and Sweet, ^Histor}'- of English Sounds,’ pp. 154-6. 

See also ‘ Die miltelenglischen Mundarten,’ by Richard Jordan, * Gennanisch- 
Romanische Monatschrift,* ii. 124. 

^ When immediately before a iDersonal pronoun. 

2 In verbs of OE. second weak conjugation. 


b 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


xviii 


ORTHOGRAPHY AND PRONUNCIATION 

7. ]\licldle English orthography is based on older English spell- 
ing, but shows marked influence of French orthography. The 
union of the two systems produced many apparent irregularities, 
some of the most important of which are as follows : 

Vowels : The OE. digraph when representing a long sound, was dis- 
placed by Cf as in hw^te ‘ wheat,’ The short OE, £S had already become a, 
pronounced as in artistic, 

att interchanged with a before a nasal in closed syllables of French words, 
sometimes in those of English origin, as au7iswere beside answers. 

ie (j/e) was used for long close £ in late Middle English, as in hef * dear,’ 
helief^ more naturally in French words as mischief. 

o took the place of short wdn proximity to w, u (z/), ze;, to prevent con- 
fusion of manuscript forms, sometimes also in other places. Examples are 
•woftede ‘dwelt,’ icomen ‘come,’ 'mode *wood’; also late ME. bote ‘but,’ 
corage ‘courage,’ where the use of u might have suggested the long sound, 
ou i^ow) for iif sometimes as in hdus ‘house,’ cdu]>e ‘ known,’ c<ym for long 
w, and sorottiw), ‘ sorrow’ for short u. 

V for especially in initial position, as Vftder ‘ under.’ • 
y and i are used interchangeably for OE. i or long or short. Especially 
before zz, vi^ m^y commonly takes the place of i in late Middle English, 

to prevent confusion, as in the case of 0 for u above. It also takes the place 
of z in the diphthongs ai, ei, oij ui, especially when final in syllable or word. 

Consonants : There were even more variations from OE. usage in the case of 
consonants. In the first place, the OE. forms of f r,.s, zy, now seldom pre- 
served in printing OE. texts, gave ’way to French forms of those letters which 
are nearer to those used to-day. Besides, 

c is used in early Middle English for ts, as in blece7e for hUtscn ‘ bless ’ ; see 
also t%^ je, for the same. Later c {sc) and ce were used for voiceless s, s$, as 
alee ' also,’ lescun ‘ lesson, 

ch is used for OE. palatal r, as well as for ch in French words; examples, 
chirche * church,’ chase. When doubled, .cch {chcJi) are written, as in wicche 
{wychchi) ‘witch.’ 

r/, cht, are sometimes written for {ht), as in ‘ might.’ 

Jf^ot capital /occurs in late Middle English* 

g (the French form, our modem g) took the place of the guttural stop, as in 
goldf and gg {g) the place of OE. cg^ as in brigge ‘ bridge.’ g also occurred 
sometimes for French soft^ {=f)> as in jugen ‘judge.’ 
y (the English form of g) was used for the palatal spirant g{gh)t as in mi^t 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION xix 

^ might’; for OE. g (=;>') initially, as in ‘je’; and sometimes in late 
Middle English for voiced s, as side^ ‘ sides,’ by confusion with z, 
gh for spirant in later Middle English, as in might, mi^ht * might’; 
the combination with / was also sometimes \Yritten gth, ^tk, as in knigth 
‘ knight.’ 

gu occurs in late Middle English for the guttural stop of French words^ as 
guards and sometimes in English words before a palatal vowel, as guest, guilt, 
to avoid confusion with g as in gest 'jest.’ 

i (consonantal) was occasionally used for initial ^ (=^)) as in ' gave ’ ; 
also for /, as ioy 'joy.’ 

/ initially in French words, as jugen 'judge/ in later Middle English. 
k came to be used for c before e, i, and n, sometimes before a, o, u, the 
former because c before e, i, in French words was s in sound; examples are 
hipen ' keep,’ king, kdre ' care,’ kni^t ' knight.* 
qu for OE. ew, as in quen * queen,’ as well as for French qu {^ — kw), as in 
quite ; it was also occasionally used fqr hw, as in qtiilk ' which.’ 
sell, sh, ss for OE. sc, as in schal, shal, ssal ' shall.’ 

St for hi sometimes, as nist ' night.’ 

th displaces p, which had itself displaced almost entirely in eaily Middle 
English. But } occasionally remained to modern times, especially in the forms 
yS {^the),yt {=^that), where ^ represents^ with an open top. 
tz occasionally for ts, as in bletzen ' bless.’ 

u (consonantal), later v, for voiced f, as in heuen, heven, OE. heofon 
‘ heaven.* 

iv was used in later Middle English for u, in ou, especially when final in 
word or syllable, as cow, earlier cu, cm ' cow.’ w also rarely occurs for v» 
y (consonantal) in later Middle English for earlier ^ {=y) ; also for p (pk), 
through confusion with / with open top, as already noted. 

z occasionally for ts, as in mstimenz * vestments ’ ; rarely also for voiced s, 
as in wgzele ' weasel,’ though common in Kentish. 

Note i. — In early Midland the older orthography prevails, as ce beside 
a and e, and the rune for w, as by Orm. A large number of the peculiarities 
already noted are also found. The most important orthography of the period 
is that of Orm, who indicated pronunciation with minute care, especially by the 
doubling of consonants, the relations of which will be discussed under ‘ Changes 
in Quantity.’ Minuteness in other respects may be indicated from his use of 
separate signs for the stop g, as in God, the spirant as in ME. ^if ' if,’ and the 
MnE. g as in singe. 

Note 2 , — Nth. shows few distinctive peculiaiities. Especially to be noted 
are the indication of length in the vowels a, e, 0 , by adding *(y) in late Nth. 
Thusaf {ay), ei {ey)-, oi {py) correspond to ME. d, e, 5, Besides, cht and gM 
arc used for the palatal spitant, as in mycM * ani^t ’ ; gk fcarthje psdatad spir^ 

b 2 



XX 


GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


in other situations, as his:h, hight ‘ promised’ ; qu regularly for OE. hw, as qua 
‘who,’ qulU ‘ white.’ Sth. shows the following peculiarities: e, in early Sth., 
for OE. (E ; ie (ye) for long close especially in Kentish ; oa (ad) for long open 

in early Sth.; u for OE^long and short, sometimes ni (tiy) for OE.y; 
ue, u, oe (p) for OE. eOy less commonly for OE. e, and occasionally for OE. eo 
(e)i the same usage is also often found in West Midland ; shi and ss were 
all used for sli^ OE. sc. 

8. Accents were sometimes used in early Middle English to 
indicate long quantity, or occasionally for emphasis. In a later 
time they were also sometimes employed to indicate that a final 
e 01 y was not silent, as in plenii. The breve was also sparingly 
used to indicate short quantity. The common means of indicating 
long quantity, however, whether of vowels or consonants, was by 
doubling the letter, as good, OE. ' good,' wtccke ‘witch.’ The 
doubling of vowels when long was increasingly common in later 
Middle English, and accounts for double vowels in many modern 
W'ords. Cf. also the indication of long vowels by digraphs, as in 
the table under § 7. 

9. Abbreviations are not uncommon in Middle English texts. 
Some of the most frequent are a macron over a vowel for following 
n or m, as cd for com, hi for him,}ng for ping\ a curl above a letter, 
sometimes through the stem of it, for er, re, ur ; a small undotted 
f above the line for n; a roughly written a for ra. Certain common 
words were often abbreviated, as y, later for and ; pt, later yt, 
p, d for that (the /) ; qd for quod ‘ quoth ' ; wt for wip, with ; % for 
king\ d for hishop ; s’ for sane/, sant, saint] ihc, ihu for Jesus, Jesu. 
As such abbreviations admit of no misinterpretation, they are regu- 
larly expanded in all the texts of this book with no further notice 
than a single reference to the earliest. Even this has not been 
thought necessary except in case of abbreviations for words, as 
and, that, king, ko. 

JO. The following table shows the approximate pronunciation of 
the vowels and diphthongs of Middle English. The order chosen 
is that which represents essential relations of the sounds, as of pitch 
and physiological formation, rather than the merely conventional 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


xxi 


order of the alphabet. It will thus be possible to see at a glance 
the sounds which are closely related in fundamental characteristics 
and may therefore most easily interchange. 


THE VOWELS 


Short 
ij as in h/t. 
e, as in men. 


a, as in artistic. 

o, as in n^t (not Italian a). 

u, as in iuW ^ 


Long 
i, as in machine. 

0 (close), as in th^y, but without 
vanish. 

f (open), as in Ih^re, cart. 
a, as in ^rt, father. 

9 (open), as in l<?rd. 

6 (close), as in n^?, but without vanish, 
u {pu)i as in f<?^l. 


THE DIPHTHONGS 

in (iw), as z + zz, or ew in few, 

ei (ey), as ^ + z sounded together. 

eu (ew), as + zz, later as etv in iew, 

ai (ay), as in aisle, more nearly as of + 1, 

au (aw), as ou in h^wse, ow in zow, 

oi(oy), asinjVy. 

pu (ow), as 0 in Drd + u, 

ou (ow), as ^ in nt7 + u, 

ui (uy), rare, as « + z. 

^ The question ofhow far the quality of OF. u in phis was actually adopted 
in the speech of the Midland and Northern districts, and how long it retained 
its purity, cannot be positively settled. It agreed, however, that toward the 
end of the period this sound had fallen in with OE. short u or had become iu. 
From the small number of words with this OF. sound, and from their 
necessarily gradual adoption, it seems more than doubtful whether the pure 
French pronunciation ever existed on Midland (Nth.) soil, except as spoken 
by those who knew French. The exact quality of the vowel is naturally most 
important in rime, and the lack of significance of it for our purposes may be 
indicated by the fact that there is in this book but one rime, twice repeated, with 
this vowel. This is the rime,ytfr7/ ; veriu (97, 17-18 ; 99, 3-4). For practical 
purposes, therefore, we shall disregard the French quality of this vowel and 
consider that from the first it had fallen in with OE. u and the ME. diphthong 
eu (iu), Cf. Behrens, * Franz. Sprache in England,* p, 1 18 ; Luick, ^Anglia,* xiv. 
287. 



XXll 


GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


II. Theoretically there are two sets of the diphthongs eu^ gu 
Wd ou^ those with the first elements long or short, according as they 
^^eveloped from long or short vowels or diphthongs in Old English, 
deed, Orm distinguished them in his orthography (see § 71, n.), 
otherwise they are not distinguished in written forms and can 
separated only by a knowledge of their development from older 
igUsh. As their later development also shows no separation, the 
tinction of long and short diphthongs in Middle English may be 
sregarded for all practical purposes. Besides, the distinction 
•tween gu and ou^ iu and eu, was not long preserved, and that 
.ween ei and ai, which was frequently confused in Chaucer's 
iglish, as shown by his rimes, was lost in late Middle English, 
i. new ou before (Jit^ ghi)^ as in oujt {ought), developed during 
the period, but, as it often interchanges with 0 and has had a separate 
development from either of the ou diphthongs (compare English 
ought brought with know^ grow^ how in rainbow), it need not be 
pronounced diphthongic, The combination uz was never sufficiently 
common to merit consideration beside the other diphthongs. By 
a slight conventionalization for practical purposes, these nine 
diphthongs may thus be reduced to five at most. Those who wish 
to make more minute distinctions have but to refer to the historical 
basis of the sounds. 

Note i. — Early Midland English shows sonae considerable retention of 
OE. pronunciation, as of OE. orthography. Owing to many peculiarities of 
orthography, however, most words must be analysed in relation to their earlier 
and later forms in order to be sure of their pronunciation. See, for example, 
the passages from the Chronicle and notes thereon. 

Note 2 .--Nth. has no differences in pronunciation not sufficiently indicated 
by the ^llmg, as the retention of OE. d as 5] Sth. has, in addition to the 
above, the sounds e, from OE. ce, as a in viatv ; ii, from OE. y, with the older 
mutated sound, as in French ^lus\ and u {ui, uy), from OE. y, as in French 
lune^ 

la. The consonants are in general pronounced like those of 
IVjodern English, except as already explained under orthography.. 
In addition, doubled consonants are to be pronounced long, as, in 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION xxiii 

smne ‘ sun/ which differs from sune ^ son ’ ; cA was pronounced /sJij 
as in church to-day, whether in English or French words; has the 
sound of German ch in ich^ auch, except initially. For other notes 
see the Phonology under each consonant. 

13. As to word-stress or accent, we must distinguish between 
Teutonic words, that is those from Old English and Norse, with 
a few from Low German, and the ever increasing number from 
French. The former, which make the basis of the speech, were 
in general accented as in Old English— simple words on the first 
syllable, compound words on the first syllable if nouns, adjectives, 
or w’ords derived from them, on the root syllable if verbs, or adverbs 
formed from prepositional phrases. Even in Old English, however, 
the prefixes ge, for^ usually le^ and sometimes un, al^ and the 
borrowed earce ‘arch/ were unstressed in nouns and adjectives. 
In addition, during Middle English limes, the prefixes U 7 t^ al, 
and usually miSt lost accent in nouns and adjectives, except in 
almost, also, and alway{s), which have retained prefix stress to the 
present time. There was also a shifting of accent to the second 
element of some nouns, as at present in man'hind^, Northumbrian, 
a stress which was occasional in Old English, as shown by 
Norji'hymbron, ‘ Battle of Maldon' 266. A similar shifting of stress 
affected adjectives when in predicate rather than attributive positioi\ 
as today in thirteen ; compare ‘ he^s thirteen ’ with ‘ a 'thirteen year 
old boy/ In all such cases the stress can be certainly known only 
from verse, whare the metre will sufficiently indicate the position of 

the accent. ' * - , / 

14. New compounds in Middle English also followed the general 
law of stress, as in ^domesdai, 'sometime, ^whosg, id’/gre, wip'uien* 
Sometimes the root, sometimes the prefix syllable was stressed in 
new compound adverbs, as }erfgre,}>erof, into, intil, upon. Secondary 
stress, which was strong in Old English upon the second elements 
of compounds, was still so in Middle English. It ia especially 

A tamed 'period indicates stress cai the syllable before which- it is placed^ 



XXIV 


grammatical introduction 


important for ME. metre, since this strong secondary stress wa,s 
often elevated to a principal position in the line of verse. This is 
particularly true of certain syllables, wholly unstressed at present 
when next the principal accent, as ande (ende) inge, ]re, nesse, schipe, 
like {ty, liche), hood, dam, tsh, y. 

15 . Borrowed words of French origin vary in stress during the 
period, as they at first retain their original stress on the final 
syllable (except weak e) or tend to assume the Teutonic ^ress. 
Thus rffoww ‘ reason ’ is variously accented, rgsdun or 'rpsoun, in 
Chaucer’s verse. The following general principles may be set 
down. Old French nouns and adjectives tend to assume the 
Teutonic stress on the first syllable. Disyllables, or trisyllables 
with final weak e, when acquiring stress on the first syllable retain 
a strong secondary stress, corresponding to the original principal 
accent. Examples are piile, prUoun, mdnere. Trisyllables, or 
polysyllables with weak e, which originally had secondary stress 
on some antecedent syllable, shift principal and secondary stress 
respectively. This brings principal stress on the first syllable, as 
in chdriil,emperour, pdraiis, or sometimes on the second zspovirte, 
victdne, religtun, condidun. In the latter cases a second shift of 
the principal stress may take place, as in victone, pdverte. On the 
other hand, many nouns and adjectives, especially prefix compounds, 
never acquired stress on the initial syllable, as accouni, affair, 
utfempt, con-dicwm. This may have been due to the fact that 
there was no secondary stress on the prefix in 01cl*French, more 
often to the influence of the corresponding verb. Disyllabic 
OF. verbs, accented on the first syllable, fell in with uncompounded 
English verbs and suffered no change of stress, as -preieijt), -suffre^n). 
Polysyllabic verbs fell in with native compounds in retaining stress 
on the last syllable (except weak e{n)), as escape{n), ass-aildn), or 
shifted it to a preceding secondary stress as -pumshAn), dim'imshe{n), 
condidone{n). A further shift to prefix, perhaps under the influence 
of the corresponding noun, may take place, as in cdn/brtelff). The 
best guide to stress in Middle English is metre, but this, while 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


XXV 


usually sufficient for itself, is no certain guide to the pronunciation 
of every word in prose. 

Note i. — Following the principles above, and sometimes no doubt under 
the influence of analogy, OF, verbs fall in with Sth. verbs ending in as 
caiye(ft), chasiTein), In Midland and Nth. such OF, verbs in ier usually 
assume the common infinitive ending e(n). 


PHONOLOGY! 

The Vo^vels of Stressed Syllables 

SHORT VOWELS 

i6. Middle English a, pronounced like Italian short a or un- 
stressed a in ariistic^ is one of the commonest sounds, and occurs 
in English, Norse or Danish, and French words. It springs from : 

1. OE. a, g before a nasal except when lengthened, and d when 

shortened : OE. a as in asscken ‘ ashes ' ; OE. g as in 
began {bigan) ; OE, d as in asken (axen) ‘ ask,' alderman, 

2. OE. CB (Merc. e=cB), and ^ from Teut. at by f-mutation, 

sometimes ^ (Merc, e, Gothic e) by shortening : OE. ce as 
in cal {kai) ; OE. ^ from Teut. ai as in agasien ' terrify,' 
ladder, fat \ OE. m (Merc, e) as in hladdre ^bladder/ naddre 
(addre) ‘adder,' dradde ‘dreaded' (cf. § 33). 

3. OE. ea (Merc, sometimes a) before /• + consonant, and ea by 

shortening: OE. ea as in harpe ‘harp,' sharpe ‘sharp'; 
OE. ea as in chapman ‘ merchant,' chaffare ‘ merchandise.' 

4. ON. a, g by z^-mutalion of a (ODan. a\ and d when shortened : 

^ In the following descriptive chapters on Middle English sounds the 
borrowed elements are treated with the native, as their considerable importance 
warrants. Attention is first given to the Teutonic element. Old English and 
Old Norse or Danish, and then to that derived from Old French. Differences 
between Mercian, on which the Midland dialect is based, and West Saxon are 
also noted. The notes are intended to cover, in order, first, early Midland 
English, next the principal variations of the dialects. 



GRAMMA TICAL INTROB UCTI ON 


XX vi 

ON. a as in carl, want^ siac ' stack ' ; ON. g as in adlen 

'gain', bark (of a tree); ON. a as in laien 'let.' 

5. OF. a as in barge, Anne, cas (later c^e) 'case.' 

17. The principal sources of ME. a will be seen to be OE. a, cb, 
ea, and g from a before a nasal, which all regularly become a in 
Midland English, as well as long OE. d, ce, ea when shortened. 
A large number of OF. w’ords also belong here. Besides a from 
regular OE. cb, ME. a sometimes springs from OE. cb instead of/ 
by 2-mutation of a (cf. Sievers, Gr. § 89). This usually appears in 
ME, in closed syllables before nasals, ch (ccJi), and r, as in wanden 
beside wenden ' wend,' panis {pans) beside penis (pens) pence, 
lacche 'seize,' macche (less commonly mecche) 'match, harly {harlic, 
seldom herlic) 'barley.' As indicated, in most cases of this sort 
forms with e also appear ; cf. § 19. OE. g from a before a nasal, 
which was regularly lengthened before ceitain consonant groups 
(see § yz), sometimes appears as a by earlier shortening, especially 
in certain words as land, hand, sianden ' stand,' gangen ' go, hangeit 
'hang,' answeren 'answer.' West Midland, however, sometimes 
has 0 for a before nasals not causing lengthening, as in mon ' man,' 
but this was not common enough to be a distinguishing feature of 
the dialect. For OF. a before a nasal +• cons., see § 56. 

18. Certain forms with a corresponding to OM. e (Goth, e, WS. 
require special mention. They occur before r in unstressed words, 
as ]>ar beside per (Sth. pgr), whar beside wher (Sth. whgr), waren 
beside weren (Sth. wgreri) ' were.' Corresponding forms with long 
open o ip), on the other hand, must have developed from eME. forms 
with d existing beside the shortening here supposed. For these 
see § 43. Words with ME. a sometimes rime with words, as 
if pronounced with e, at least dialectally. There would thus seem 
to be double forms of such words, as was-^wes, fad-fesi, gadren-- 
gedren ' gather.' Rarely also a becomes 0, as before v in govel 
'tribute,' hove 'have,' and in qmp {quod) 'quoth,' where it is 
probably due to lack of stress. Individual words which also show 
interchange of 0^ are masse-^messe (Nth. always messe by influence 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


xxvii 


of OF. messe) ‘mass/ gadeUng-gedeling less commonly, idgadn-- 
togedre {idgidre). The word Chester (-Chester) < OE. ceasier 
regularly has e in Ml., though a in Nth. Doncaster, &c. Forms 
with e are also common from shortening of OE. m and Merc, e, ce, 
as under § 1 9, 2 below. 

Note i. — In early Midland this sound was -till represented by the older 
Mercian ce or e, as in hcefden (Jiefdeit) ‘ had/ wcss (rm) * w'as/ (efter iefter) 
^ after.’ The digraph ea is not found in the ‘Chronicle’ after 1132, but the 
Mercian variant eo once appears in weorf for wearp. Even before 1132, its 
interchange with OE. a probably indicates that it was not diphthongic much 
after 1 100. Orm never uses ea, and only exceptionally ce for short a. 

Note 2. — Nth. agiees with Midland in almost every particular. Before 
a nasal, however, it has a for OE. g {a before consonant groups causing 
lengthening), except in viony beside many ‘ many,’ which is characteristically 
Northern. Sth., in the earliest period, generally shows a for OE. a, e (a, ea) 
for OE. a, ea, as for ea when shortened. Later all become a, as in Midland, 
except that Kentish, which had e for WS. a in Old English, retains it regularly 
until late ME. times. For OK Kentish uses, in the early period, ia {ya, yea). 
Minor variations are not noted here. For OE. g from a before a nasal (except 
before consonant groups causing lengthening) Sth. has a in western Sth. and 
in Kentish, but often 0 in middle and southeast Sth. Before consonant groups 
causing lengthening, d or g are found in Kentish and southeast Sth. The 
London dialect has a with great regularity except before consonant groups 
causing lengthening, and even here in later ME. by shortening, as commonly 
in tand, England, hand, <Src. 

19. Middle English e, an open sound like that in men, has the 
following origin. 

1, OE, e, § by z-mutation of a, eo, and e, eo by shortening: OE. 

e as in west, helpen ‘ help ’ ; OE. e as in men, hei, tellen ‘ tell ' ; 
OE. eo as in self, heven ‘heaven'; OE. e as in meite (OE. 
7 neiie) ‘ met ' ; OE. eo as in fell (OE. feol) , ‘ fell,* derre 
(OE. deorrd) ‘ dearer/ 

2. OM. e (WS. te by z-mutation of eo), e after a palatal consonant 

(WS. le, later j/), and when shortened e, a (Gothic WS. 
m, ea after a palatal cons.), e (WS. te by z-mutation of ed), 
and sometimes m by z-mutation of Teut. ai\ OM. ^ as in 
W&cm (WS* wiercan) ‘ work * j OM. e as in j^lp '{WS:jzelp) 



xxviii 


gramma tic a l introduction 


‘ 3 ilen (WS. ^telan) ‘get’ ; OM. /, S as in skpie (WS. 
slSpie) ‘slept,’ shepherde (WS. sdephierde) ' ] OM, 

e as in hersum (WS. htersum) ‘ obedient ; OE. as in evere 
‘ ever,’ {everich, everilk'^, eny beside any, clensen 

‘ cleanse.’ 

3. ON. e, or § by ?’-mutation of a : ON. e as in pwert ‘ thwart ; 

ON. / as in eggen ‘ egg or urge on,’ 5 enk ‘ bench.’ 

4. OF. e as in delle ‘ debt,’ serven ‘ serve,’ defenden ‘ defend.’ 

20. The principal sources of ME. e, in native words, are OE. <?, 
/, eo when remaining short, and OE. (Merc.) e, eo when shortened. 
Sporadically, « is found forOE. r'andj/, the former in open syllables 
and in connexion with labials, nasals, and liquids ; the latter be- 
fore liquids and nasals. Examples of the first are smeien ‘ smitten,’ 
risen ‘risen,’ ckmhen ‘cVmb’ fmger ‘finger,’ wehked ‘wicked.’ 
Such occasional rimes as heUe—siilh, wille—Ielh, denne—wipinne, also 
point to the same fact. Sometimes this may be accounted for by 
confusion of forms, as in the verbs sprmgen and sprengen ‘ cause to 
spring,’ syoingen and swengen ‘ cause to swing,’ where the weak 
verbs with e have influenced the corresponding strong verbs with i. 
So perhaps welcome for wilcome by influence of wel\ Preddefox 
Pridde ‘third’ by influence of/«e ‘three.’ Unstressed position 
in the sentence may also account for some such e s, as in hsder for 
hider ‘ hither,’ here for hire ‘ her.’ Examples of e for i from OE. j/ 
are fersi, cherche, deni, slenf, beside yfrr/, chirche, dint, stint. In a 
few OF, words, ^ springs from AN. e {<OF. ue) by shortening in 
originally unstressed syllables, as heveren beside cmeren ‘cover,’ 
keverchef (kerchef) ‘ kerchief.’ 

21 . ME. e sometimes becomes i before dentals and palatals. 
Some cases which have been preserved to Modern English are 
ridden ‘rid,’ rideles ‘riddle’ with loss of final j, hinge, lingren 
‘linger,’ singen ‘singe,’ grinnen ‘grin,’ minglen ‘mingle.’ In 
Jnnken ‘think’ {OE. pgncean), found in Midland and Nth. from 
the thirteenth century, there is no doubt confusion with pinken 
‘seem ’ {OE. pyncean). Sth. keeps penchen {penken), and Chaucer 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


XXIX 


separates the two except in preterit and past participle. Beside e 
sometimes appear forms with o ox u from OE. eo after w, as in 
szvordf worp^ worpi 'worthy/ worpen [purpen) ‘become/ So 
swolwen {swolhen) is from a form with OE. e after w. This change 
had no doubt begun in Old English as similar forms appear in that 
period; cf. § 26. For e to fin unstressed prefixes cf. § 83. 

Note i. — Early Midland shows for^, less commonly cco for eo^ as in (sten^ 
higaten for eienj bigeten^ and aorl for eorl, in the * Chronicle/ The ‘ Chronicle ’ 
and Orm also have eo for OE. eo sometimes, as in iveorces < works/ heom 
* them/ weor}enn * worth, be,* heoffne * heaven.* 

Note 2. — The dialects in general agree with Midland. Early Sth. usually 
preserves eo^ though sometimes it becomes ^.or e^ and occasionally ti as in 
dupe ‘ deep,* mulk ' milk.’ Sth. also sometimes has e or WS. ie (later y) from 
e by influence of a preceding palatal consonant. In all cases Sth. e must be 
separated from Sth. ^ = derived from OE. t?, ea^ as already noted in § 18, n. 2. 
Kentish has ie {ye) for OE. eo^ as in ierpe ‘earth,’ lyeme ‘learn.* Kentish 
also retains OE e for jj/, so characteristic of this dialect in OE. times, thus 
increasing greatly the number of ^’s in literature of this district. 

22. Middle English f, with a sound like that of i in hit^ is 
common in words from all sources. Its frequency is increased for 
Midland English because it corresponds not only to i in English 
and Danish words, but to older j/ by f-mutation of u, the latter 
having become i in sound. On this account also the vowel is 
represented by i ox y at the pleasure of the writer. ME, i springs 
from ; 

1. OE. f,,j/ by f-mutation of and when shortened i and j?: 

OE. fas in smip ' smith/ his^ wrifen ‘ written’ ; OE.j/ as in 
king {kyng\ synne ‘ sin/ ktssen ' kiss ’ ; OE. i as in fifiene 
'fifteen/ wisdom) OE. y as in wisshen 'wish,’ Jydde 
' hid.’ 

2. OM. f (WS. f(?), and e (WS. ed) before ht\ OM. f as in rihten 

'make straight,’ Irihie 'bright/ wiht ‘wight,’ milk) OE., 
OM. e as in riht ' right/ knihi ' knight,' liht ' light, easy/ 
jiihi ' flight/ 

3. ON. i^y by f-mutation of and t oxy when shortened ; ON. 



XXX. 


GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


2 as in skill, skin^ iwinne ‘twin’; ON.jj^ as infliiien ‘flit, 
hggen ^build/ hndlefi ‘kindle^ ; ON._p as in imis ‘variously/ 

4. OF* z*as in simple, prince, delwren ‘deliver/ cite ‘ city. 

23. For e instead of 2, from OE. see § 20. For forms wiLh 
u, beside those with j^hy f-mutation of tc, see § 28. One word, 
OE. zvi/man, shows various forms, Kswimman, wimmen by shorten- 
ing, and by later change of i to u (written d) under the influence of 
preceding w, wommati, vjonwien* Similar influence of to is seen in 
woII{e) ‘will.’ By Caxton’s time, however, the forms of Modern 
English, with the sound of u in singular, z in plural, seem to have 
become established. OF. ui\ sometime.s appear as z in unstressed 
syllables, as in malisun, werrior for original ei, and angwys 
‘ anguish ’ for ui (§ 70). 

Note i. — T he use of i for OTL.y is found as early as 112T in the ‘Chronicle 
and regularly later and in Orm. There is also early use ofy for OE. showing 
conclusively the like charactec of the two sounds. Later, y is more generally 
used for OE. f, f. 

Note 2. — Nth, agrees with Midland. Sth. shows ?/, as in French plus, for 
OK. y by f-mutalion of ti, as already noted, § 5 * Examples are siinne ‘sin, 
fiilde ‘filled,’ kiln ‘kin,’ disse ‘kiss.’ Sth. ti also appears for a late WS. y 
from i, ie, as in wUile, wiiten. Ml. ivitle, loiten, ^ili for Ml. {^ei), Kenti.sh, 
on the other hand, which had levelled OE. y by f-mutation of u under e, still 
preserves the latter, except before palatal hi, ng, and in kiztg. This accounts 
for such form.s as melle ‘mill/ chercJie * church,’ lest ‘lust,* dent ‘dint,* in 
that dialect. The dialect of London probably agreed with Sth. in the earliest 
time, but by the last quarter of the fourteenth century usually has i forOE. y, 
though sometimes an e which is probably Kentish in origin, Chaucer fre- 
quently uses this Kentish e beside Midland i in rimes, though mostly in closed 
syllables. * 


24. Middle English <?, with the sound of 0 (not Italian a) in 
Modern English, occurs in words from all sources. It corre- 
sponds to : 

I, OE. 0, of 0 when shortened: OE. 0 as in folk, hodiy {body) 
‘body/ cok ‘cock,’ on) OE. b as in softe ‘soft/ oper 
‘ other.' 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


xxxi 

2. ON. 0, 0 when shortened : ON. o as in lot ‘ bow of the head/ 

loft ' upper room/ odde ' odd ' ; ON. o as in poh ‘ though.' 

3. OF. 0 as in apostle^ potdge^ offis * office/ kostdge. 

25. Short 0 occasionally interchanges with e by z-mutation a^^o, 
as in Wodnesday beside Wednesday^ wolken beside welkin^ sorwen 
beside serwen ‘ to sorrow.’ It also becomes u sometimes, by in- 
fluence of preceding < 5 , m, or w, as in hurd for hord ‘ board/ wurd 
for word^ murp ‘ death ' (cf. hlnE. murder^ OE. niordor). Probably 
an OE. interchange of 0 and u accounts for plocken ‘ pluck,’ OE. 
pluccianx knockm ‘knock/ OE. cnocian^ cnucian\ prostel beside 
prustel ‘ throstle,’ OE. prostle. For beside e from OE. eo (e) see 
§ 21. 

Note. — In general early Midland and the dialects all agree. Early Sth., as 
in Layamon, occasionally uses eo for OE. 0 as in keors ' horse,’ heord {beord) 
* board,’ and individual writings, as those of Shoreham, show ou for <?, as in 
sourwe ‘ sorrow.^ 

26. Middle English u, with the sound of u in full^ is common in 
English, Danish, and French words. Its sources are : 

1. OE. u, and u when shortened : OE. u as in under, sunne 

‘ sun,’ drunken ‘ drunk ’ ; OE. u as in us, buxom, huiefi, 

(hute, hut) ‘ but,’ OE* heutan, buian, 

2. OM. u (WS. eo by preceding palatal^ (2) and sometimes sc), as 

in Jung ‘ young/ schunen ‘ shun,’ 

3. ON. u, and u when shortened: ON. u as in lule ‘bull,’ ugU 

‘ ugly ’ ; ON. u as in scum, husken ‘ prepare.’ 

4. OF. u, or U in closed syllables : OF. u as in purse, suffren 

‘ suffer’ ; OF, U as in juggen ‘judge,’ humble, 

27. Middle English is often written 0 (seldom oti), especially 
in proximity to n, m, u {v), w, as already noted under orthography, 
§ 7. This use- of 0 for u accounts for such forms as wolf woll 
‘ wool/ wode ‘ wood,’ son, ion, come^ love, and many others which 
have remained to Mockrn English. Beside dure ‘ door,’ as above, 
there is also a ME. dgre {dggre) with lengthened vowel, probably 
from OE. 4 or, or some such form with 0 instead of u, OE. eo 



xxxii 


GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


becomes u after w sometimes, as in wurpen ‘ become,’ wur)>^ wurjn 
‘worthy’; cf» § 21. So OF. becomes u occasionally as ixi/rut 
* fruit/ friiiesi§re * fruiterer/ and in unstressed syllables u (beside 
/ § 23) as in hiscut (cf. §§ 61, ^o). 

a8. Forms with u beside those with from OE. j', probably 
depend upon OE. forms with u beside others with mutation. Ex* 
amples are cluster^ OE. cluster^ clyster \ hrusiel beside Iristil, lluscen 
‘ blush/ clucchen ^ clutch/ dull {doll) beside dill " dull/ ruscke beside 
rische {rasche) ^ rush/ muM (Sth. mucheT) beside mthel, shuitel beside 
schlid 'shuttle.’ In other cases analogy accounts for a form wdth 
ti instead of y^ as hmtgren influenced by the noun hunger^ sundry 
by the adjective sunder. 

Note. — JEarly Midland and the dialects agree in general. From this u (OE., 
ON., OF. «/) is to be separated of course Sth. ii from OE. jK, as already ex- 
plained under ME. 2, § 23, n. 2. The writing of o for u, as above, is not found 
in early Midland, as the * Chronicle’ andOrm, and not until the last half of the 
twelfth century even in Sth. From the middle of the thirteenth century it 
becomes common. 


LONG VOWELS 

229. Middle English a, with the sound of a in art, is limited 
in its occurrence, so far as Teutonic words are concerned, by the 
change of OE., ON. ^ to ^, § 41. Long a results from the length- 
ening of OE. and ON. short a under various conditions, and fre- 
quently appears in French words under similar circumstances. 
Its sources are as follows : 

1. OE. a when lengthened, as in dale, gate, Made, name, gdmen 

® game, sport.’ 

2. ON. a when lengthened, as in idhen 'take,’ dasen ' daze.’ 

3. OF. a when lengthened, as in /dee, grace, place, age, pale 

' pale.’ 

30. The lengthening of the older short a occurs in open syllables 
(cf. § ^3), or in OE. monosyllables with final consonant, most of 
which assumed in ME. an inorganic, final e. By reason of the 
latter change the unstressed syllable became open, and the a vowel 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


xxxiii 


subject to the lengthening which affected syllables originally open. 
OE. a before certain consonant combinations which caused length- 
ening in late OE., when remaining long, had of course become 
ME. g, as in the case of original d. 

Note. — The dialects agree. In Nth. this newly lengthened u fell in with 
d from OE. ^ (§ 43, n. 2). In INth. d is often written ai (ajr), as noted under 
§ 7, n. 2, and still later (the early fifteenth century) az from whatever source 
sometimes shows monophthonging to d, as travdle from travaile, 

31. Middle English written or later especially ee^ represents 
two different sounds, which are of different origin and are, in 
general, kept distinct throughout the period. The first of these, 
called open e and often designated at the present time by a tag 
below (/), had the sound of the vowel in there, care, hear. The 
second, called close e, had the sound of e in they, or of the first 
element when they is pronounced with a diphthong. The dialectal 
differences, which are especially important in the case of these 
two will be noted, as usual, under each of them. There are,, 
in addition, occasional interchanges of sounds naturally so much 
alike, as shown by rimes, but these are probably due to dialectal 
confusion or the same poetic licence that is sometimes found in 
Modern English. 

32. Middle English open e (|) develops from : 

1. OE. m (Merc, e sometimes) by f-mutation of Teut. at, ea 

(except WS. ea before c, h, g), and when lengthened e and 
/ by z-mutation of a, ox ea\ OE. m as in * deaV hpen 
' heal,^ h§ie ‘ heat ' ; OE. ea as in dgd ‘ dead,' dgf ' deaf/ 
l§d Mead/ hpn ‘beam,' hfued ‘head'; OE. e as in hrjken 
‘break,' hgren ‘bear'; OE. § as in stgde ‘stead/ swgren 
‘ swear ' ; OE. ea as in grd ‘ dwelling-place,' grn ‘ eagle.' 

2. ON. ^ by z-mutation of Teut. ai, and when lengthened e, or 

/ by z-mutation of a : ON. a as in gpen ‘ guard,' hgf^en 
‘mock'; ON. § as in ‘fist/ skiren (beside skerreri) 

‘ scare.' 

c 



xxxiv 


GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


3. OF. /before /, AN. / by monophthonging of ai, ei, and OF. e 
when lengthened : OF. // as in naturjl ^ natural,’ condicio 7 tJl 
‘ conditional ' ; AN. / from at as in trpon ' treason/ rpbn 
‘ reason/ pp ^ peace/ pe ‘ e2LSQ/fpts ‘ shapely ^ ; AN. / from 
et as in dp ^dais/ encrp ‘ increase ' ; OF. e as in Ipte ^ beast/ 
fpie 'feast.’ 

33. The principal sources of ML / are OE. e of whatever origin 
when lengthened in open syllables (§ 73), OM. ea though far 
less common than WS, ^5 ea^ and OF. or AN. /. In a few cases 
OM. close e seems to have become open /, though the exact cir- 
cumstances under which this occurs are not easily made out, 
owing to the uncertainty as to certain rimes in long e. Thus, 
while keeping apart ME. open and close as a rule, a poet may 
have allowed himself occasional impure rimes, as in every period 
of English. Less careful poets no doubt did this more frequently, 
so that it is impossible to formulate a principle except from a 
considerable number of cases in more than a single poet. Besides 
the rimes there is also Orm’s significant use of <^ (=/) for certain 
words with OM. From this and from rimes it seems likely that 
Ohl. e gave / after w, /, and r, as in wp ‘ wet,' wjpen (later wepen) 
^ weapon/ Iphen ' cure,’ r^den * read, advise.’ But not all such 
words, especially not all in which Orm uses (Sj can have had 
open / in all cases in ME. The practice of this book is to rest 
the probable quality on the usual development of the OM. sounds, 
especially when confirmed by later English, though recognizing 
the possible variation in well established cases. Thus OE. ^ from 
Teut, at seems to give ME. e (beside/) when final, as in se ^ sea.’ 
Similarly the AN. / from at) ei before r becomes ME. e (beside |), 
as in poer ‘ power,’ dubonere ' debonair/ gramer ‘ grammar.’ 

34. The AN. monophthonging of ai^ ei took place especially 
before s, /, d,v,s cons., a palatal 4- liquid cons., and sometimes 
before r. Even under such conditions diphthongic forms some- 
times appear, as aise ^ ease ’ beside pe. 

Note r. — In early Midland the digraph ce was still used for open as in the 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


xxxv 


* Chronicle’ sa * sea/ Sr ‘ ere/ Svre * ever/ Orm also regularly uses the digraph 
for open as iu sS ‘ sea/ hSte ‘ heat/ from OE. and in daf^ diezS,*JlSt * floated/ 
&c., from OE. as well as for OM. e sometimes ; see § 33. 

Note 2. — All the dialects agree, in general, with the usage above indicated. 
Early Sth. sometimes has probably a digraph rather than a diphthong, and S 
beside Sth., however, except Kentish and early Sth., has a much larger 
proportion of open I* sounds from WS. S, ea. Thus Sth. open ^“springs from 
the following sources, in addition to the above : 

\VS. Gothic (?, as in biren ‘ bore.* 

WS. ea. by influence of preceding palatal cons., as in g^r ‘ year,’ gifen 
‘ gave,’ pi. 

WS. ea before palatal c, g, h, as in hlh ‘high/ Ige ^ eye.’ 

WS. ea (//ai) before / + cons., as in k^lcS(n), Ml. /iNde{n)<,OM, haldan. 
Kentish and eastern Sth., together with a small district in the extreme north of 
middle Sth,, agree with Midland and Nth. in the main. On the other hand, 
Kentish has ea^ ya, yea for OE. ea^ the first element being a close e, sometimes 
even u Kentish also has sometimes le beside eioe WS. to, eo, 

35. Middle English close e is the development of: 

1. OE. <?, e by /-mutation of eo^ and e or eo when lengthened in 

late Old English : OE. e as in her 'here' ; OE. e from 0 as 
in gre7te ' green/ seken ‘ seek,’ heche ' beech, ’/<?/ ' feet ’ ; OE. 
eo as in be ' bee/ sen ' see,’ tre ' tree,’ dere ‘ dear ’ ,* OE. 
<?, eo as in feld 'field,’ scheld 'shield,’ ende 'end/ erj?e 
' earth.’ 

2. OM. e cognate with various WS. sounds : OM. i (WS. 

Goth, e) as in here ' bier/ even ‘ evening,’ heren pt, pi. of 
h^ren ‘ bear/ ‘ year,’ ^even ' gave ’ ; OM. e (WS. 

eOy ea before OE. Cyg, h) as in fie^en-flih * fly-fiew,’ sec ' sick,’ 
heh ' high,’ neh ' nigh ’ ; OM. e (WS. le by /-mutation of ea), 
eo, as in heren ' hear, obey,’ ned ' need/ steren ' steer ’ ; 
OM. e from earlier e (WS. ie, late le by /-mutation of ea) as 
in elde ' eld,’ erve ' heritage,’ derne ‘ secret/ 

3. ON. e, j by /-mutation of 5 , and lu (to) : ON. e as in ser 

'several’; ON. / as in sleh ^ sly* /ere 'power,’ epen 'cry, 
call’ (cogn. OE. wepan 'weep’); ON. iu {id) as in mik 
'meek/ skef ' soon/ 

4. OF. e, and AN. e by monophthonging of OF- ie, ue^ some- 



xxxvi GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 

times of a {teu): OF. as in degre ‘ degree,’ camper 
'compeer,' proceden ‘proceed’; -AN. e from ie as in gref 
‘ gne{’ pece 'piece,' manere ‘manner,’ achSoen ‘achieve^) 
AN. /from ue as in lef’heei; peple ‘people,’ v^en ‘move’; 
AN. iTfrom ai, ei {leu) sometimes, as ra gramer ‘grammar, 
poer ‘ povrei,’ par de < OF. par dieu. 

36. While the sources of close e seem so various, they resolve 
themselves into a much smaller number if we consider the charac- 
teristic phonology of the Mercian dialect, in which this sound was 
especially frequent as compared with West Saxon. In fact the 
sources of far the larger number of words may be summed up as 
OM. e, eo, e in late lengthenings, corresponding, however, to various 
WS. vowels, as e, eo, S, ea, early and late u {f). To these must 
be added the important OF. sources, from which come many 
words, and the less important ON. contingent. 

gy. The variation between ME. open and close ^has been noted 
in § 33- A few words with OE. eo show 0 instead of e in Middle 
English by reason of a shifting of stress and absorption of the first 
element of the diphthong. Examples are OE. Mo ‘she’ which 
gives {jo, ho) beside he (Sth. M, ha), and OE. seo ‘ she which 
gives scho {sho) beside scM {she). Similarly jode (IN th. jude) from 
OE. geeode, and for fower, irowen see § 60. For words with ei from 
AN. e < ie see § 53. To the AN. monophthongs of ai, ei may be 
added verre (OF. verai), and mone (OF. moneie), beside the more 
common forms. Monophthonging in originally stressed syllables 
which have lost the stress are exemplified by suden {suden) ‘sudden.’ 
Besides forms with e from AN. e (OF. ue) occur others with 0 (cf. 
§ 45). In unstressed syllables this e becomes short, as in cover eti, 
beside coveren, keverchej", ‘ kerchief.’ Certain Romance words with 
e {ei) beside {eie) forms (cf. § 63) depend upon Central French 
forms with e {ei) beside AN. eie. Examples which belong here 
are cunire {conlre) ‘country,’ jorne ‘journey.’ In the case of ME. 
de^m {deien) ‘die’ the word may be from an OE, source, rather 
tb^in from the ON. word with ^ reduced to^^ (cf. | 52). For ME. e 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


xxxvii 


for AN. e {< OF. ue\ by shortening in originally unstressed syl- 
lables, Cf. § 20. 

Note i. — In early Midland eo is occasionally used for OE. (Merc.) e or eo^ as 
in * Chronicle ’ {OE ,ferde) ‘went forth, died,’ deovUs (OE. deofles) 
‘ devils,’ preostes (OE. preostes) ‘ priests.* Orm also sometimes uses eo for OE. 
U, as in preost ‘priest.* It is probable, however, that this was rather 
traditional spelling in his time than the representation of a real diphthong. 

Note 2. — Nth. agrees with Midland except for ei {ey) written for e (§ 7, 
n. 2). Sth, differs in a number of important respects owing to a different 
development from older West Saxon and Kentish. Middle and western Sth., 
the old West Saxon district, shows the following peculiarities : 

e [f], seldom Hy rarely ?, for WS. ie by ^-mutation of ^ or a before / or 
r-\- cons., or of ea, eo not before a palatal cons. 

e or I*, seldom for WS. te after a palatal cons. 

Kentish and eastern Sth. differ from Midland and Sth. in having: 

e from WS. y, for WS. a of whatever origin, and for WS. u after a 
palatal cons. 

iay ya, yea (close e with obscure second element), for WS. ea before / or 
^+cons. 

te beside e for WS. eo by or i>-mutation. 

The Katherine group, representing the northern part of middle Sth., agrees 
with Midland in having e for WS, Gothic e, but e, ea for Ml. a before r in 
unstressed words ; also e for WS. le by /-mutation of ea and eo. In addition it 
has : 

d for WS. ea before / + cons. 

ea, se, S (open or close e) for WS. ie by f-mutation of ea before / or 
cons. 

i for WS. ie by /-mutation of the eo breaking. 

38* Middle English /, with the sound of / in machine, corre- 
sponds in Teutonic words to older / and ioy by /-mutation of u. 
In addition to these two principal sources it occurs in many words 
of French origin. Like ..short /, as already noted (§ 22), it is 
written / or y, with a growing tendency toward in late Middle 
English. In detail the origin of ME. / is as follows: 

I. OE. I, y by /-mutation of u, apd / ot y when lengthened; 
OE. I as in wis 'wise,'.^ Jive ‘five,' wriien ‘write'; 
OE. J? as in Ind ‘ bride, ^ hyde ‘ fir ‘fire' ; OE. / as in 
mid, child, fiTiden ‘ find ' ; OE. j/ as in kind ‘ kind.* 



xxxviii 


GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


2. ON. J, jp by z'-mutation of t 7 ; ON. f as in N^ende * tidings/ 

/>rzven 'thrive’; ON. J? as in sz/e {sll) 'pain/ in Grimeshi 
' town.’ 

3. OF. i when lengthened, as in crun ‘ cry/ prime ‘ prime/ detif 

* delight/ hibU ' Bible/ 

39. There seems to be no evidence of lengthening of ON. i^y 
in Middle English, such words as skinden ‘hasten/ kindlen 'kindle’ 
preserving their short vowels. This would perhaps indicate that 
such words entered the language after the OE. lengthening before 
nd had taken place, though the examples are too few to make this 
certain. In a few cases OF. ei becomes I in a syllable which loses 
principal stress, as werrun 'make war/ falling in with OF. verbs in 
ier (ME. ten sometimes) as carryen ' carry/ 

Kote I. — Early Midland shows no special peculiarities. 

Note 2.— Nth. agrees with Midland. Sth., which preserves the older 
mutated sound of// as already mentioned (§ 2), used for it u {tif) under the 

influence of French orthography. Examples are huren {hfdrm) ‘ hire/ ftir 
(fuj/r) * ' make known.’ With this u from OE. j? in Sth. also fell in, 

in some cases, a French with the sound of u in French lum to-day. This 
was easily possible owing to the similarity of the two sounds in Sth., but in 
Midland, which had not preserved the older mutated sound of OE. y this 
French il finally associated itself with the diphthong eu (Ju ) ; see § 60. As 
already noted under close e (§ 37, n. 2), Kentish has B for OE. 7 in accordance 
with older Kentish. 

40. Middle English 0, like ME. <?, represents two different sounds 
of different origin and development. The first, open 5 designated 
by Pi had the sound of o in lord. The second, close was pro- 
nounced like 0 in no^ or like the first element when no is pro- 
nounced with a diphthong. These two sounds are usually kept 
apart in Middle English rimes, and in general have maintained 
a separate development to Modern English, 

41. Middle English open 0 {g) springs from : 

I. OE. <2, and when lengthened g from a before a nasal or 0 in 
open syllables : OE. d as in tg ‘toe/ gpe 'oath/ sign ‘stone’; 
OE. g as in Igr^ 'long,’ sirpng^ spng; OE. 0 in hgse ‘ hose, 
trousers,’ prpte ‘throat,’ hefgre {bifpre) ‘before.’ 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


xxxix 


2. OM. d (WS. ea, ed) from a before /</, as in gld^ bgld, 

cgld^ 

3. ON. d, and when lengthened g from nasal or 0 in open 

syllables : ON. d as in Igte ‘ countenance/ hrgpe ‘ violent/ 
rgpen ^ counsel, explain ' ; ON. as in wrgng, wgnd * rod ’ ; 
ON. ^ as in hgle ‘ stem of a tree/ scgre ' score.' 

4. OF. when lengthened in open syllables, and AN.o + rze (OF, 

oire): OF. 0 as in rgse, ngble, restgren ‘restore'; AN. one 
as in glgrze {glgry\ sigru {sigry\ memgrze ‘ memory/ 

42 . The principal sources of ME. open g are OE. d, and when 
lengthened in open syllables OE., OF. Special note should be 
taken of the small group of words with OM. d from a before Idj 
since WS. forms could not possibly account for the MnE, words 
old, hold, &c. In the few possible cases OE. d, preceded by a 
cons. + w, early developed 0 {<g) under the influence of w, as in 
iwo ‘ two,' swopen ‘ swoop.' Preceding w alone did not affect the 
change (cf. Hempl, ‘Jour, of Germ. Phil.' I, 14). In the case of 
sg which seems to have open g more commonly in Midland, we 
may perhaps assume a late OE. sd with loss of w, 

43 . In § 18 attention was called to certain words with ME. 
eME. d (see the strong preterits like bgren ‘bore'), where we expect 
Ml. e (OM. €, WS. m). These may possibly represent an OM. d 
beside e or from /, may be due to analogy or to Norse influence, 
such forms having d in Old Norse. Norse influence certainly 
seems probable, though see the discussion in BjQrkman, ‘Scand. 
Loan-words in Mid. Eng.,' p. 84. 

Note i. — In early Midland OE. d often remains as in ‘ Chronicle ’ dpes * oaths, ' 
stdnes ‘stones.* Orm, too, writing in northeast Midland not far from the 
northern border, has d regularly as in Nth, From the beginning of the 
thirteenth century g was the rule. 

Note 2.— In Nth., as already noticed (§ 5), OE, d remained d through the 
period and is thus a distinguishing feature of that dialect. In early Sth,, d is still 
written, though beside g, pa (op). From the thirteenth century g (ga) are 
regular, as in ‘ Ancren Riwle.’ The change of ^to J after cons. + w, noted above 
for Midland, was very late in Sth., probably not taking place until 1400, 



xl GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 

44. Middle English close 3 springs from : 

1 . OE. 0, or 0 from 0 before certain consonant combinations : 

OE. 5 as in dd?n ' doom/ god ‘ good/ cok ‘cook ' ; OE. o as 
in gold, hord, word, 

2. ON. 0 as in ione ^ prayer, boon/ hope ' booth/ crok ' crook/ 

3. OF. 5 (AN. u), o rarely, AN. 0 from OF. ue sometimes : OF. 

0 as in irpo7t ‘ treason/ harm, condicion ; OF. 0 as in povre 
{pore) ^poor,'/^/ ®fool'; AN. 3 from ue as in mdven ^ move,' 
proven ‘prove/ ddlen ‘gtieve,'/^^Z? ‘people/ 

45- “ OF. words in 0, especially before n, beside AN. forms with 
u (cf. § 46) are common in early Middle English. Forms with AN 0 
from OF. ue, by monophthonging, occur beside those with e already 
noted (§35). In unstressed syllables this AN, 0 becomes 0, as in 
coveren ‘cover,’ 

Kote 1.— Early Midland and the dialects agree in general. In late Nth. 
this sound is frequently written u, indicating a change in the direction of 
French eu in peu, the sound of Scotch u in gude ‘good.’ 

46. Middle English u, with the sound of the vowel in hoot, is 
found in words from all sources. Under the influence of French 
spelling it is often written du {Wv\ but this orthography never 
indicates a diphthong in the case of this vowel. The sources of 
ME. u are : 

1. OE. u, and u when lengthened : OE. u as in ful ‘ foul,’ 

* house/ out, loud, how; OE. u as in wfmde ‘wound,’ 
grund {ground) ‘ground/ 

2. ON. u, and u when lengthened: ON. u as in him ‘ready, 
prepared/ MnE. ‘hound,' shuten ‘project,’ drupen ‘droop'; 
ON. u as in lund ‘ nature, disposition/ 

3. AN. u as in croune ‘ crown/ doute ‘ doubt,’ avdwen ‘ avow,’ 

mmni, acdunt, flour precious. 

Note i. — E arly Midland has no special peculiarity, except that H is never 
written with French but regularly with the English symbol. 

Note 2. — There is general agreement in the dialects with regard to ME.- u. 
In the thirteenth century the French ou came to be used for ME. « first in Sth., 
where it was especially necessary to distinguish this sound from u (U) for OK. 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION :di 

y. Later it spread to other dialects, and in late Middle English became the 
rule. Eor Sth., in the earlier period especially, ME. « must be carefully 
separated from u (u) for OE. j?. For Sth. u from French «, with the sound in 
French lune^ see § lo, footnote. 

THE DIPHTHONGS 

47. As has been shown (§ 3), the OE. diphthongs became 
monophthongs in Middle English. Their place was supplied by 
certain new diphthongs formed from certain combinations of OE. 
vowels and following consonants. The change probably began in 
late Old English, and was certainly completed in the early Middle 
English period* The formation of the new diphthongs follows the 
accompanying scheme : 

1. An OE. palatal vowel, €, Ja, a palatal ^ or ^ became 

azj eu 

2. An OE. guttural vowel, ^ ^4- guttural hot g became au, ou^ 

3. An OE. palatal vowel, J, I, ea^ eo^ and occasionally 

medial /{i, e. v) when developing into w, became eu, 

4. An OE. guttural vowel, <2, ^4- and occasionallyyas above, 

became au, ou, 

48. As the vowels of these formulae were long or short, two sets 
of diphthongs resulted in the earliest period. This is proved by 
the orthography of Orm, who doubles the second element of the 
diphthong in all cases when the first is short. On the other hand, 
long and short diphthongs were not otherwise distinguished in their 
written form or in their later development, so that they need not in 
general be separated. A more essential distinction, especially in 
the ou diphthongs, is the quality of the first element, which was 
either open or close according as it developed from OE, d and 0, 
or from OE. 0, Even these can be distinguished only by knowing 
their origin in Old English. The diphthongs naturally developed 
most readily in the case of a following w, as in soule, OE. sdwle 
' soul,^ growen, OE. growan ‘ grow.' They next appear when g {h) 
are final, medial between vowels, or between vowel and voiced con- 
^nant, as in sazde, OE. scsgde ‘ said,’ drawen, OE. dragun ^ draw/ 



xlii 


GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


Only occasionally do they appear from a vowel and a medial/' {v), 
as in hawk, OE. hafoc 'hawk/ Before OE. ht, sometimes before 
final or medial h when still preserved, a parasitic z or u developed 
in later ME., as meighie ' eight,’ draught ' draught,’ nought, wrought, 
and these diphthongs have usually had a somewhat different 
development from others. Diphthongs are also occasionally formed 
by the development of a parasitic vowel before other palatal con- 
sonants than h and g, as in hleinte^ OE. hlencte ' blenched,’ meinde, 
OE. mengde 'mingled/ aische, asce 'ashes,' fieisch, CSR, flmsc 
' flesh.’ 

49- To these diphthongs of OE. origin must be added some 
from other languages, especially Danish and French. These 
usually associated themselves with those of English origin, as will 
be seen from the following sections, but in the case of OF. of {uz) 
a new diphthong was added to the language. 

Note.— When it is said above that the OE. diphthongs became monoph- 
thongs in Middle English, it should be remembered that in Kentish the older 
diphthongs were preserved to a late period. These have been noted already 
under § 37, n. 2. The consonants g and h do not immediately disappear on 
the formation of the diphthong, which is probably due to the formation of 
a parasitic vowel before the consonant. This accounts for such forms as deigen 
^die,’ in * Gen, and Ex.' The consonant^ appears especially when in conjunction 
with t. For a late monophthonging of ei and ozi sometimes, see §§ 54, 69. 

50. Middle English ai^ in the earliest times, had the sound of 
the diphthong in high. As ai came to rime with ei in late ME., its 
pronunciation probably assumed the sounds a (as in man) + / in 
the course of its development. It springs from : 

1. OE. cEg^ as in dai {day), mai {may) 'may,’ sayde ' said.’ 

2. ON. ag rarely, as in gainen (ON. gagna), kairUc (Orm 

ka^jerrk^^c)\I from Norse kj gur as Brate ' Nord. Lehnworter,’ 
p. 46. 

3. OF. ai, as in payznent, paien 'satisfy, pay,’ hitraien 'betray.’ 

51. Attention has been called to the development before OE. ht, 
no diphthong appearing as early as in other cases. In mi^i, nijt, 
OE. (Merc.) mceht, nmht, i resulted from the influence of the 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION xliii 

following palatal. There could therefore be no diphthongization 
in these cases. OF. <?/ appears as from the twelfth century, so 
that the number of at forms is considerably increased in this way. 

Note i. — In early Midland the first element of the diphthong is written a or 

and the last element ^sometimes. Thus the * Chronicle ’ has d&i ‘ day.’ 
Orm writes da^^ ‘ day,’ * may,’ in accordance with his usual spelling of 

the diphthong. He also has mahht^ nahht, * mighty night.* In ‘ Genesis and 
Exodus ’ migt^ nigt appear beside magt, nagt. 

Note 2. — INth. becomes a (§ 30, n. z). Early Sth. has ei for Midland 
and Nth. ai^ as in dei^d^y^ ‘may,*in accordance with its usual use of e 
for OE. Sth, also developed the diphthong ei before ht^ sometimes much 
earlier than the other dialects, as in eihte ‘ eight.* 

52. Middle English <?;, with the sound of ^ + 2, comes from: 

1. OE. eg^ or §g from ag^ mg from Teut. aig^ and eg from dg by 

2-mutation: OE. eg as in wet (wey) ‘way,’ pleten ‘play’; 
OE. ^g as in eije (eie) ‘fear, awe ’ ; OE. mg as in fete ‘ fay,’ 
del ‘clay,’ kei ‘key’; OE. eg as in feien ‘join,’ wreien 
‘ accuse.’ 

2. OM. eg corresponding to various WS. vowels : OM. eg (WS. 

mg, Goth, eg') as in grei{y) ‘ gray ’ ; OM. eg (WS. eag, eog) 
as in jleien ‘fly,’ dreten ‘endure’; OM. eg (WS. teg by 
2-miitation of eag) as in Men ‘ bend.’ 

3. ON. ei (mi), and / y (ey) by f-mutation of Teut. au : ON. ei2iS 

in reisen ‘ raise,’ heiten ‘ bait,'>(?2* ‘ they ’ ; ON. ^y (ey) as in 
cy ‘ aye,’ cairen ‘ go, return,’ traist ‘ strong, confident.’ 

4. AN. ei as in preien ‘prey,’ sireit ‘strait,’ peinien ‘paint,’ 

kweynie ‘ quaint,’ aqueyniaunce* 

53. While these sources seem to be various they are, in reality, 
very few. Thus ME. ei springs from OE. (Merc.) eg (mg) from 
whatever source. The principal foreign sources are ON. and OF. 

diphthongs, which are responsible for a considerable number of ei 
words. In a few native words ei develops from e under the in- 
fluence of a following palatal consonant or consonant combination. 
Here \>€ioxig jieisch beside flesch (OE, Jlmsc) ' fiQs\i,\w€isch (weis) 
beside wesch ‘ wash,’ leinde beside kngien (lettien) ‘ spring,’ bleincie 



xliv GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 

{hhinia) < hhncen ^blench/ dreincte {dreinte) < drencen 'drench/ 
Some AN. words have a diphthong ei {e), (at) where OF. forms 
have e (ee) ; examples are coniraie {coniray) ' country/ jorneie 
l^jornay) 'journey/ Cf. § 37 * words with OE. 

z-mutation of Teut. atg (see i above), we should expect ME. 
ai by early shortening of a* Either this did not take place in the 
few words belonging here, or more probably the open ^ quality 
was changed to close e under the influence of the following g* In 
a few cases ai (ay) springs from AN. e (OF. ii) as maynteynan 
'maintain/ susieynan 'sustain/ perhaps by analogy of words ending 
in ei{ai)ne, for example aiteinen 'attain.' Beside AN. forms in 
az (ai) occur cognates from Central French in ozi see § 64. 

54. For early confusion between OF. az and az words see § 5 ^* 

ON. words with ^y also usually appear in Middle English with az, 
perhaps indicating early change of quality from az to az. There is 
a tendency in late ME. to confuse all az s and az s as already noted 
under ai (§ 50). This is shown even as early as Chaucer, who 
sometimes rimes ai and az. Besides, ME. az, more especially irt the 
southeast Midland as shown by Chaucer’s usage, occasionally 
becomes a monophthong f, by palatalization of the first element 
and contraction. Examples are pa?t 'fly/ drten dzen 

{(^en) ' die,' sye 'saw/ A similar change took place in late Middle 
English in such words as heigh, neigh, sleight, by which they 
acquired the long t which later became the Modem English 
diphthong ai. 

Note i.- — E arly Midland has at, as in 'Chronicle ata 'awe, OE. age. Orm 
writes for H, for N in accordance with his usual orthography. 

Note 2, Nth. writes ai even in the earliest texts (last half of the thirteenth 

century) for ei (except for ei from OE. eg{Ji% as in )ai ' they,’ ay ' aye/ raise, 
pray ^ prey,’ paint. Ei from OE. eg{Ji) does not become t in Nth. ; cf. Scotch 
‘die, eye.’ In INtb. « became Sth. does not differ from Midland, 
except that the palatalization of ei, from eg, to t does not seem to occur.' 

55. Middle English au, a diphthong with the pronunciation of 
that in house, is of common occurrence in both native and foreign 
words. In general it develops from OE. a’\-w or g when final or 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


xlv 

medial in voiced company, while it also appears in many words 
borrowed from Old French. In detail, its sources are : 

1. OE. aw or eaw, dw or eaw when shortened, and rarely q/b 

{ea/o) by vocalization of _/(=z;): OE. aw or eaw as in 
clawe ‘ claw/ raw^ straw ^ awel ' awl ' ; OE. dw or eaw as in 
tawen (OE. tdwian, perhaps tawtan) 'prepare/ aunen, 
iaune 7 t (OE. "^eawnian *(gteawman) ‘ show ' ; OE. a/o {ea/o), 
as in hauk (OE. heafoc^ hafoc) ' hawk/ natiger (OE. na/ogar) 
' auger/ and OE. afl as in craulen (OE. craflian) ' crawl' 

2. OE. ag^ ahh, and aht^ or when shortened dhi {&ht ) ; OE. ag 

as in drawen (earlier dra^eri) ' draw/ gnawen 'gnaw ’ ; or 
ahk, as in lau^hen ' laugh/ lauhte ' laughed ’ ; OE. dht {^hi) 
as in auhte {au^te) 'aught/ iauhte (^augte, tau^ie, iau/iie) 
‘ taught' 

3. ON. ag as in lawe 'law/ awe^felawe 'fellow/ 

4. OF. au, as in cause, pause, applaude^i 'applaud,' assault 

56. As already noted the diphthongs which develop from ag (K) 
appear later than those from aw (cf. § 48). In Romance words, au 
from OF. a before a nasals- cons, (except nk and;^ + the stop g) 
appears in Middle English from the thirteenth century. The exact 
quality of this sound is not clear, but it seems not to have been 
a strict diphthong like OF. au, and was more probably an open 0 
sound like that of OE. g from a before a nasal, varying with a as 
the interchangeable orthography would indicate. Its development 
during the period is different under different circumstances. It 
falls in with ME. a as in sample, champion, chance, branch, and in 
unstressed syllables as servant, countenance*, with ME. d as in 
chamber, change, danger, grange, strange ; and with’ ME. au or ou 
before hi as in daunt, vaunt, paunch, staunch, lawn with loss of final 
d. A similar au appears from OF. ave before a nasal, as in aunfer 
beside aventure ' venture, Sidventme,* paraunter, probably laundere 
'laundress/ Cf. Behrens, 'Franz. Sprache in England/ p. ^7, 
Luicfc, ^ Anglia,’ XYI, 479 f* 

JfOTE I.— In early Midland, as in the other dialects, the change of ^ to 



xlvi GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 

iiad not been carried out. Thus Orm writes dra^henn for OE. d^dgctn draw, 
The change was not completed, perhaps, until the beginning of 
the fourteenth century. 

Note 2.— In early Sth., OE. g, which became vocalized to w, was written h, 
as in drahen ^drav\%’ but the diphthongic change was completed by the beginning 
of the thirteenth century, as in ^ Ancren Riwle ’ drawen ‘ draw/ In Kentish, 
however, for OE. ag is found as late as the middle of the fourteenth centnry ; 
cf. ' Ayenbite of Inwit.’ The earliest Nth. texts, the last half of the thirteenth 
century, also show the change complete. In Nth. before hi{Jih) no au diphthong 
develops, but the au diphthong is otherwise increased by the addition of au 
from OE. dg^ since in Nth. OE. & remained d (§§ 5, 43, n. 3). In Kentish 

also, OE. frequently remained dw, beside ou^ and only later fully developed 
<7?/ in all cases. 

57. Middle English eu iew) represents two slightly different 
sounds as the first element was open or close e. This gave a 
slightly different pronunciation to the two through the period, but. 
they became one in early Modern English, when the first element 
of each had assumed the sound of i\ 

58. Middle English eu, with the sound of open e+u iwfool, 
has its principal sources in OE. e {eo), or d {ea) -h w. In detail 
these are as follows : 

1. OE. ew {eow), gw Qozv) from Teut. aw by f-mutation, ww, eaw, 

are rarely gf OE. ew {eow) as in sewen 'sew’; 

OE. gw {govD) as in ewe ; OE. ^ as in mew ' sea bird,' 

lewed {lewd) ' lay, lewd ' ; OE. eaw as in dew, hewen ' hew/ 
fewe ' few ’ ; OE. ^as in m)te (OE. e/ete) ' newt.’ 

2. OF. eau in originally unstressed syllables as in heaute {beute) 

^ beauty,' lewie ' loyalty.' 

Note r. — In early Midland OE. dw (eaw) was written as in ' Chronicle’ 

/au ^ few,’ Orm daw ^ dew,’ shawen ‘ show.’ The consistent use of a for OE. 
d (ia) shows that the first element of the diphthong w^as still long. 

Note 2. — ^Nth. does not differ from Midland. Early Sth. has ea many 
times, as sheaul^^en ‘ show,’ leawede ‘ lewd.* Kentish also has ea {yea) for 
OE. ia\ see § 34, n. 2. 

59. Middle English eu, with the sounds of close e+u {/oat), has 
its principal sources in OE. eow, OM. ew {eow), less commonly 
.OE. Iw and OF. diphthongs of similar quality. It springs from : 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


xlvii 


1. OE. eow, sometimes iw: OE. eow^ as in ew {yew) ‘yew/ 

hrewm ‘rue/ chewen ‘chew/ hrewen ‘brew/ knew ‘knew/ 
grew ‘ grew ' ; OE. tw^ as in steward beside eariier siiward^ 
Tewesdai beside Tiwesdai ‘ Tuesday/ 

2. OM. ew {eow) corresponding to different WS, diphthongs: 

PM. ew (WS. dw, Goth. ew\ as in hilewen ‘betray'; OM. 
eow (WS. lew^ Iw by z-mutalion of eow)y as in hewe ‘ hue/ 
7 iewe ‘ new ' ; OM. eow (WS. iw\ as in spewen ‘ spew/ 
clewen ‘ ball of thread, clue.' 

3. OF. eu (zeu)y and sometimes H, Hz: OF. eu (leu), as in Jew 

‘Jew/ Hebrew, sewen ‘sue,' curfew, rewle ‘rule'; OF. U, 
especially when final or before a vowel, as in viriew ‘ virtue,' 
crewel ‘ cruel ' ; OF. Hi rarely, as in frewte ‘ fruit,' seute 
‘ suit.' 

60. Here belong many preterits of reduplication verbs with OE. 
eow, as hew ‘hewed/ &c. To these, in later English, a few were 
added by analogy, as drew, slew, ME. dr oh (drou), sloh. {slou). 
Words with OE. zw were largely reduced in number for Mercian 
by their appearance in that dialect with eow. Perhaps on this 
account early ME. stiward becomes steward, OF. words with 
u {ill) sometimes show a like phonology. On the other hand, 
words with ME. eu from OF. eu {ieu) sometimes have iu beside eu, 
as in riwle Juus'=^Jiues, Beside forms with eu {ew) OE. eow 
gives ow sometimes, by absorption of the first element of the 
diphthong, as in irowen ‘ trust, believe,' trow'^ {trouthe)' ‘ truth,' 
fewer ‘four/ In ME. du {dw,^du) ‘you' OE. eow has become ic, 
perhaps earlier ou as a diphthong. 

Note i. — In early Midland, OE. eow is sometimes written beside the new 
diphthong. Thus Orm writes neowe ‘ beside,’ newe ‘ new.’ 

Note 2. — Early Sth. preserves eo, as in treoi^ ‘true,’ in accordance with 
§ 37, n. I. Otherwise the dialects are in general agreement with Midland. 

61. Middle English iu is rare in native words and later falls in 
with eu (see above). That it developed in later ME. limes from 
OF. U {ill) when lengthened is certain (cf. Luick, ‘Anglia,' XIV, 287)* 



xlviii 


GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


How early this came about depends upon the question how far 
OF. u was adopted in its purity in Middle English (cf. § lo, foot- 
note). We •shall here assume that OF. u (Ui) were diphthongal 
from the first, or practically so. Middle English iu has therefore 
the following origin : 

1. OE. iw as in siiward, later steward, Tiwesni^ht ‘Tuesday 

night.’ 

2. OF. il and ui (AN. U sometimes) : OF. u as in rude, huge, 

usen ‘use/ accusen ‘ 2.ccnsQ," pursuen ^ pursue; 7 iature,misure 
‘ measure/ duk ‘ duke/ pur ‘ pure,' veriu ‘ virtue ' ; OF. Hi 
(AN. ii sometimes) as in frut (^fruit), sute {suite), anui 
‘ annoy/ nuisance. 

62. Confusion with the ME. diphthong eu has been noted under 
that combination. OF. ui also becomes oi as in the following 
section. On the other hand some words with ew appear with iu {iw) 
as riwle*m\t,' or, in unstressed syllables, 2^ (=2’/^?) as in construe{n) 
‘construe,' Sth. asunun ‘excuse.' 

Note. — I n Nth. and NWMl. OF. il sometimes becomes u, as in L'^k 
‘Luke,^ regularly in the ending ure, as armour ‘nrmor.’ 

63. Middle English oi, with the sound of the diphthong in coy 
but with close 0 as the first element, is almost exclusively of romance 
origin. It springs from : 

OF. oi (i.e. gi), oi (AN. id, sometimes ei), and AN. /, n 
(OF. 0) : OF. oi, as in joie ‘joy,' choice, cloister, noise ; OF. 
oi (AN. ui), as in destroien ‘ destroy,' Troye ‘ Troy,' vois 
‘ voice/ crois ‘ cross/ moiste ‘ moist ' ; OF. oi (AN. ei some- 
times), as in quoynte {coint) ‘ happy, gay,' quointzse ‘ skill/ 
point, enointen {anointen) ‘ anoint,' joint, coin ; AN. 1 , n 
(OF. 0), as in soik ‘ soil,' spoilen ‘ spoil/ despoilen ‘ despoil/ 
oil,joinen ‘join,' Burgoine. 

64. Attention has already been called to AN. ei {at) for OF. oi 
in some words, accounting for such MnE. forms as acquaint, quaint. 
Nth. aquynt ‘ acquainted ' shows monophthonging of AN. eu Beside 
fbnns with oi from ui may be mentioned the rare froit, beside fruit 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


xlix 


{/rut) ' fruit/ IslE, jewel {juel, Jouet) has perhaps been influenced 
by OF. ju^ jeu ^ game.’ ME. boie ‘ boy ’ is certainly of ultimate 
Teutonic origin, and possibly from an unrecorded OF. M^ord. In 
hroiden^ pret. pi. and pp. of OE. hregdan^ oi develops naturally 
perhaps from OE. og before d (§ 179). For ui beside oi see 

k 70- 

65. Middle English ou, like eu, represents two different diph- 
thongs which, however, came together in late Middle English, and 
were not always distinct in the earlier ME. period. The two 
sounds differ, as one had open, and the other close 0 for its first 
element. 

66 . Middle English gu, with the sound of open g-^u {/ool), has 
its principal sources in OE. ow^ og and d-^w or dg, while some 
Norse words with au have ranged themselves with these. Its 
sources, in detail, are ; 

1. OE. dw, dg{h\ dhi ; OE. as in sowen ' sow,’ hlowen ^ blow,’ 

crowen ^ crow ’ ; OE. as in owen ^ owe,’ dou {doh^ dogh) 

* dough ’ ; OE. dht, as in oup ' ought,’ oupe^ ^ ought’ (vb.). 

2. OE. ow, og {hj hk\ oht^ and when shortened oh or bht\ OE. 

ow^ as in tow ^ coarse flax ’ ; OE. og {h^ hk)^ as in bowe ‘ bow 
of the archer,’ flowen ‘ flown,’ irou^ {troh, trogh) ‘ trough,’ 
couj {cogh) ‘ cough,’ coujcn (OE. cohhettan) ‘ cough ’ ; OE, 
oht^ as in douper ‘ daughter,’ boujt ‘ bought ’ ; OE. as 
in touj {fohj togh) ^ tough’; OE. dht, as in soup ‘sought,’ 
foupen ‘fought’ (pp.). 

3. ON. og, oh when shortened, and ou {ai 4 )\ ON. og, as in lows 

‘ fire ’ ; ON. dh, as in jou i^poh, pou/) ‘ though * ; ON. ou (au), 
as in nout ‘ cattle,’ routen ‘ roar,’ rouste ‘ voice.’ 

67. In a few cases double forms appear, as OE. dht becomes 
short (cf. § 55) or remains long until OE. d had become ME. g as 
in I above. 

Note i. — In early Midland the diphthongs had not yet developed in the case 
c>f dg, oht, as already noted in § 56, n. i. Orm thus writes a^Jien 'owe/ 
OE. agan, 

d 



1 


GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


Note 2. — The dialects agree in general. In Nth., as OE. d remains, OE. 
become ctu^ not ou. Nth. aJu aht also do not develop a diphthong. 
The same is true in Kentish of ok dw which remains au, though later 
becoming on ; see § 56, n, 2. 

68. Middle English ou, with the sound of o^u {/ool), is of 
infrequent occurrence. It is from 

OE. dw^ as ingrowen ‘ fiowen siowen ' stow.’ 

69. This diphthong, which occurs in no large number of words, 
assumed the quality of gu in the fourteenth century, as shown by 
rimes of Chaucer, and has since had a similar development. For 
ou from OE. oh, see § 66. In a few words ME. oti (probably close 0) 
springs from OE- eow by absorption of the first element of the 
diphthong, as in foure (OK./^eower) Tour,’ irowen (OE. treowian) 
‘believe,’ This may also explain u {du,jdn) from OE. eow 'you,’ 
but if so the diphthong soon became u, as shown by rimes. 

70. A Middle English ui, occurring in Romance words, may 
represent OF. Ui, which soon became ME. iu (cf. § 61) or in un- 
stressed syllables u'^) as noted in §§ 23, 27. Otherwise ME. ui 
represents OF. ui, which has a diphthongal sound approximating 
ME. oi, with which it varies in early texts and by which it is finally 
displaced (§63). Examples are desi 7 -uien ' destroy,’y^>^^ 'abun- 
dance,’ Burguine ‘ Bourgogne/ After k {c) this OF. ui sometimes 
became kwi, as in ME. quylte ‘ quilt,’ Nth. a(iuy 7 it ' acquainted.’ 
Perhaps a similar change also accounts for anguis ' anguish,’ which 
sometimes seems to have stress on the last syllable. In originally 
unstressed syllables this OF. became u or fas noted in §§ 23, 27. 

Note.— A Stb. ui {ui) rarely springs from OE. as in * Ancren Riwle’ 
dhiie (<OE. dfyge) ‘dry,’ but the quality of the diphthong is uncertain. Cf. 
Sweet, ‘Hist, of Eng. Sounds/ § 717. 

VARIATIONS IN VOWEL QUANTITY 

71. As compared with Old English, Middle English shows 
important variations of vowel quantity. Some of these are exten- 
sions of changes which were operative in late OE. times: see 
Sievers, ‘Gr.,’ §§ 120-125 and notes to §§ i5o-r68; Biilbring, 



GkAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


li 


' Altenglisches Elementarbuch/ § 284 f. Others belong to the 
Middle English period, and affect not only a great number of 
English words, but also those borrowed from Norse and French. 
The best criteria for the variations in quantity of ME. vowels are, 
(i) the orthography of Orm; (2) the doubling of vowels and 
consonants, and the use of two symbols for a single sound, as ey 
for f, ut {y) for w, ea for <?; (3) the occasional use of accents or 
other signs for vowel length; (4) the rimes in Middle English 
poetry, and other metrical evidences as of syncope, apocope, &c. ; 
(5) the relation of ME. vowels to the course of their development 
in the modern period. Reference may be made especially to 
Morsbach, ^ Mittelenglische Grammatik,' pp. 65-92 ; Sweet ‘ History 
of English Sounds,' §§ 392, 616-640. 

Note. — Orm, to whom special reference is made above, undertook to indicate 
pronunciation with minute exactness by doubling consonants and the second 
elements of short diphthongs, as well as by the occasional use of the accent and 
the breve. The most striking feature, the doubling of consonants, has led some 
to believe that Orm intended to indicate consonant length, while others think 
vowel length alone was intended. In any case, however, Orm’s orthography is 
of practical value mainly in determining vowel quantity. Thus, vowels followed 
by doubled consonants are invariably short, as in staffs gladd, inn, allderrmann, 
asskenn, clennsenn ; those followed by a single consonant in closed syllables 
are long, as in bald * bold,’ feld * field,’ child, gold, gHlnd ‘ ground.’ The 
quantity of vowels followed by a single medial consonant is indeterminate by 
Orm’s orthography, but in these cases, as in closed syllables, Orm uses accents 
to show original length in many words, and the breve to show original short 
quantity in something like a third of the examples. Those who believe that 
Orm intended to indicate vowel length only, explain his failure to double the 
consonant after a short medial vowel because such doubling would have pro- 
duced confusion between such words as sune ‘son’ (OE. sunn) and sunne 
* sun ’ (OE. sunne), the difference between which was still important. In the 
case of diphthongs, the first vowel is short when the second element is doubled, 
as in clawwess ‘ claws,’ knewwe ‘ knew,’ Irowwenn * trow ’ ; otherwise long, as 
in cnmven ‘ know,’ sdwie ‘ soul,* sdwen ‘ sow.* The two views above are sup- 
ported by Trautmann (‘Anglia,’ 7, ‘ Anzeiger,’ 94, 208), Ten Brink (‘ Chaucer 
Gr.,’ §§ 96-97), Effer (‘Anglia,’ 7, ‘Anzeiger,’ 167) for the first; Sweet (‘ Hist, 
of Eng. Sounds,’ §616 f.), Morsbach (‘Mitteleng. Gr.,’ § 15, anm. 2-3) for the 
second, with which most scholars agree. On Orm’s marks of quantity, cf. 
Deutschbein, ‘ Archiv,’ cxxvi-vii. 



Hi 


GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


LENGTHENING 

7 ®. It may be assumed, in accordance with the evidences of 
lengthening in late Old English, that OE. long vowels and diphthongs 
remained long in open syllables and before a lingle final consonant, 
except as shown hereafter ; and that original OE. short vowels and 
diphthongs had become long before certain consonant groups made 
up of a liquid or nasal and a voiced consonant, as Id^ rd^ 
mb, 7td, ng, ng (j=^ng as in strange), though probably not rm- 
Original short vowels were also sometimes long in monos} llables, 
especially when final. Some examples of original short vowels 
with long quantity at the beginning of ME. times are hwd {hwo) 
‘who,' he ‘he,' hi ‘by,' nu ‘now'; wBl ‘ well,' Scotch ‘ weel V 'hf 
‘ hole ' ; Qld (aid) ‘ old,' cgmh, ende ‘ end,' hinden ‘ bind,' hard ‘ hoard,' 
gold, sund ‘ sound as of body,’ hiinde ‘ bound.’ 

Note i. — Lengthening had not taken place in Old English before consonant 
groups made up of a liquid or nasal and a voiceless consonant. In French 
words, however, u before nt, ns (nee), shows similar lengthening in ME., as in 
count, mount, ounces Jlounce, &c. ; so also OF. ^ before in some words, as 
l>§st ‘ beast, ‘ feast.’ Lengthening before U in cglt, bglt, mglten, and before 
1 st in bglster occurred in late Middle or early Modem English. 

Note 2. — Sporadic shortening occurs very early, as in Orm’s tenn ‘ten,* 
minan ‘ anon,* while in late ME., the fifteenth century, it was more common, 
especially before dental consonants, as rifd, ctred ‘ dread,* IH ‘ peraiit,’ wB, Mt 
(OE. Mt), hrBh ‘ breath,’ deth ‘ death,’ Mm. 

73. During the Middle English period OE. short a, e, 0 were 
lengthened in open syllables, as in rake ‘ rake,' name, schdme ‘ shame,' 
wgfen ‘ weave,' mfe ‘ meal,' h^pen ‘ hope,' hyse ‘ hose, trousers.' 
Examples of Norse words showing similar lengthening are taken 
‘take,’ ddsen ‘daze,' sqren ‘scare’; French words, qsen 
‘ cease,' apylen ‘ appeal,' rgse, clgsen ‘ close.' Lengthening did not 
take place, however, when the following syllable was weak, as I (J?) 
in pen^ ‘ penny/ ‘ heavy,' body. When the following syllable 
consists of a short vowel and /, r, n, or m, in French words le, See., 


^ Cf. Hoistmann, ‘Anglia, Beiblatt,’ xiii, 16. 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


liii 


the lengthening sometimes occurred, sometimes not. It would be 
resisted naturally by the strong tendency to syncopation of 
especially in inflexional forms ; but some cases of certain lengthen- 
ing are w^sele 'weasel,' ndvele ‘navel,’ crddel ‘cradle,' gDer, 
stglen. Borrowed words follow the same rule, lengthening some- 
times taking place, sometimes not. Some French words with 
certain lengthening are stable^ idhle, nghle, 

74. Lengthening of OE. short vowels in open syllables did not 
affect OE. f, or 6 for w, as in Mpe ‘ hip,^ ^iven ‘ given,' sune {sbne) 
‘son,’ numen ‘ taken,’ comen ‘ come.' But English words wEich had 
developed forms with / for OE. i {id) show lengthening of <?, as in 
clpen ‘ cleave, adhere ’ (OE. cliojian), Ignen ‘ lean ' (OE. hlioman)^ 
wgke ‘ week ’ (OE. wiocu, webcu). In all these cases the ME. forms 
with e no doubt rest on OE. forms wdth e {ed), as often in Mercian. 
On the other hand, i, u in French words are long in open syllables 
in ME., as. are n, e, 0, Examples are crien ‘ cry/ hihle ‘ Bible,' 
hrihe^ deszren ‘ desire,’ avow, prow, crdune ‘ crown.' In these cases 
perhaps OF. f, u, because of their close quality, associated them- 
selves with English z, u, rather than with z, z/, and thus assumed 
long quantity. 

Note i. — Lengthening of OE. short vowels in open syllables does not, in 
general, belong to the twelfth century, though there are some evidences that it 
may have begun in this period. It was clearly operative in the first half of the 
thirteenth century, and by the middle of tiie century was complete. In 
accordance with this principle OE. vowels in open syllables are not marked 
long in early Midland or Southern selections, even though the phonology seems 
to imply lengthening in some cases. Northern selections are all later than the 
change indicated, and therefore show lengthening in all cases. 

Note 2.— Later shortening no doubt accounts for such forms as show short 
vowels in Modem English, as rot, knock, cracky lap, ME. rgten, kngken, crdken, 
Idpcn. Sometimes also analogy accounts for the change, as in MnE. sweat, vb. 
by analogy of the preterit with short vowel, ME, swette, 

75. Compensatory lengthening also occurred in Middle English, 
as in the case of the t, u vowels, by the vocalization of a following 
consonant. Examples are I from ic {ik), site ‘ sty ’ (OE. slt£^u, 



liv GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 

early ME. siige)^ rie * rye' (OE. rygi), slile (OE. stigeT)^fuel{^fdweT) 
‘ fowl ' (OE.>:^^/), sm (OE. sugu) ‘ sow.' 

SHORTENING 

76. At the close of the Old English period, OE. long vowels and 
diphthongs, whether in simple or compound words, were usually 
shortened before long, that is doubled, consonants and before 
consonant groups, except those which had caused lengthening of 
short vowels and therefore preserved the quantity of long vowels 
(§ 72). Examples under the various heads are as follows : 

{a) Before long, that is doubled, consonants, Tedde ‘led,' spredde 
‘ spread,' hatte ‘ called,'/^//, hidde ' hid,' hatter ‘ hotter.' 

(^) Before more than two consonants, hercmn ‘ hearken,' ernde 
‘ earned,' Urnde ‘ learned.' 

{c) Before two consonants, not those groups which preserved 
long quantity, ‘ filth,' hclpe ‘ health,' hepte ‘ kept,' sUpte ‘ slept,' 
hrest ‘breast,' sb/te ‘soft,' sbhte ‘sought,' idhte ‘taught,' Uht 
‘ light,' Uhten ‘make light,' druhpe ‘drought,' but dialectal ‘'droughth,' 
little, Wednesday, clensen ‘cleanse,' hremmil {hrembel) ‘bramble,' 
slum{e)ren (plimhren) ‘ slumber,' ever, every, 

(d) Before two or more consonants in compounds, chapman 
‘merchant,' Edward, shepherds, wisdom, fifty, goshawk, cUnly 
‘cleanly,’ hushonde ‘husband,' huswife hus^y, housewife.' 

Note i.— T he short vowel is often replaced by the long under the influence 
of analogy. Thus, in inflexional forms, the shortened vowel of the genitive 
singular and the plural, as dMes, is replaced by the long vowel of the nomina- 
tive-accusative singular, d^el, becoming divtes. On the other hand, the short 
vowel of the genitive and plural sometimes replaced the long in the nominative- 
accusative, as in mbper, brSper, mother, brother, other.* For a similar 
reason there is variation in quantity in compounds, as supddle ‘ south part,* 
sopfast ‘soothfast,' hgmward ‘homeward,’ meknesse ‘meekness,’ nvisly ‘ wisely,’ 
with long vowels by analogy of the uncompounded sup, sdp,,kgm, wis. 

Note 2. — Variations in quantity are also found before certain consonant 
groups, as sf, before which the long vowel often remains, as in gdst {ggsT\ 
‘ghost,’ prest ‘priest,’ Crist ‘Christ,' Igste ‘least.’ But if a third consonant 
follows st, the vowel is regularly short, as in wrdstten ‘wrestle,’ cristnen 
‘christen,’ thistle, fistren ‘foster,’ bWstme ‘blossom,’ yet ^tren ‘easter/ Modern 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION Iv 

English shows many cases of shortening, as hest^ breast, Jist, list, dust^ rust. 
Before OE. sc, ME. sh {sch\ a long vowel is preserved by Orm in Jl^sh, though 
not in wesk ^ washed.’ Short vowels are common before sh, as in Modem • 
English Jlesh, mesh, wish, rush, 

77. Long vowels and diphthongs were sometimes shortened 
when one or more syllables with strong secondary stress followed 
the accent. Examples are holiday ‘ holiday,' kering ‘ herring/ sterop 
‘ stirrup,' noping * nothing,' ^ fellow ' (Q'^,felagi), Before the 
syllable i (j") there is variation, shortening occurring sometimes as 
in ‘ ready,’ sory ‘ sorry/ any (eny) ^ any,’ while in other cases the 
long vowel is retained, as in wy, w^ry ^ weary/ gre^ ‘ greedy,' hgly. 

Note. — Here also analogy may counteract the operation of the rule, as in 
such words as fredd7n, rld^re ‘ freedom, rider,’ where the long vowel is due to 
the influence of the uncompounded wordsy>v, riden ‘ free, ride/ 

78. Before the consonant groups which usually preserved vowel 
length (§72), original short vowels remained short or were shortened, 
when followed immediately by {a) another consonant, as in hundred, 
children ; ( 3 ) a syllable having strong secondary stress, as in zaurpi 
‘ worthy,' erp'^ ‘ earthly ' ; (^) a syllable made up of a short vowel 
and I, r, n (though not usually inflexional iP), or m, as in girdel, 
wunder, dlde 7 'man, selden {seldom^ ‘seldom/ In cases under (c) 
frequent syncope of the short vowel before the liquid or nasal is 
presupposed, so that shortening would be due to the same influence 
as in cases under {a). In some words two of the above influences 
were operative at the same time, as in wilderness, alderman. Inflex- 
ional en did not usually affect the preceding vowel, but the vowel 
remained long when n was dropped. 

79. The vowels i, u, before ng, though long in early ME. as 
shown by the orthography of Orm, were short from the middle of 
the thirteenth century-, as in ping ‘ thing/ tUnge ‘ tongue.’ Many 
cases of shortening before consonant groups also appear, especially 
in later Middle English. Shortening is most common before ng, 
rn, rl, rp. Some examples of these are Omi^prrne beside jerne 
‘ desire,' turrnenn ‘ turn/ 



Ivi 


GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


Note. — Analogy doubtless accounts for many forms, as /rend ‘ friend,’ by 
influence of frendly^fre?idship. 

THE VOWELS OF SYLLABLES WITHOUT PRINCIPAL STRESS 

So. In syllables bearing strong secondary stress, Middle English 
vowels usually retain the quality of their Old English originals, as 
fredom^ Godh^d, handsum, Tne same is usually true of prefixes, as 
in arisen ^ forlgren ‘forlorn,' uphgren ‘upbear' (cf td^ § 82). 
On the other hand, in suffixes and prefixes 0 and u before a nasal 
sometimes suffer change in quality, the first becoming a or the 
second /, partly no doubt under the influence of analogy. Thus 
the suffix ung {lung) of OE. nouns became zTig {ling) in Middle 
English, and the prefix on, except the privative prefix, became 
an {a). The privative prefix on, as in OE. onlucan ‘ unlock,' became 
un, perhaps under the influence of the negative un so commonly 
used. The greatest change in vowel quality from Old to Middle 
English, however, is in the case of inflexional endings. In these 
every OE. unstressed a, 0, or u become e, a far reaching change which 
affected all classes of words. 

Note i. — The change of OE. a, o, u to e is often carried out in early 
Midland, as in ‘ Chronicle ’ and ‘ Ormulum,’ but not so fully as later. 

Note 2. — Nth. shows complete change of ung {lun/) to ing {ling), and of 
the privative prefix on to un, but otherwise the prefix on usually remains on ( 0 ). 
The change of vowel quality in inflexional endings has not affected the Nth. 
present participle, which ends in and{e\ In early Sth. the suffix ung {hmg) 
sometimes remains unchanged, but later regularly appears as £7tg {ling), as in 
other dialects. The other changes in vowel quality already mentioned are 
carried out, and in addition the ending of the present participle has become 
inde in most cases before the further change to inge, § 163. 

81. Owing to the changes in stress many syllables in Romance 
words which formerly bore principal stress retain a strong secondary 
accent (cf. § 15). These also ‘usually retain their original quality. 
In a few cases already mentioned in the preceding sections, certain 
changes in quality do appear, ere instead olgreixom OF. aire (§33), 
merrien beside werreien (§ 39), eu instead of §u in heute ‘beauty' 
(§ hut it is not certain that such changes may not be due to 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


Ivii 


some other influence, as the following r in the first case. Similarly 
Romance nouns in -ion, which occasionally seem to show variation 
between -on 2sAgn, may have suffered by the same influence. The 
OF. prefixes des, en, mes often appear as dis, in, mis, the latter no 
doubt partly under the influence of OE. mis. Examples are 
disiroien, inclgsen, mischeef ‘ destroy, inclose (enclose), mischief.' 
OF. initial e sometimes becomes a as in ascdpen ^ escape,' anointen 
‘ anoint,' asumen ‘ excuse.' 

82. The second elements of compounds, when containing a long 

vowel or diphthong, usually retain original length under strong 
secondary stress, 2,^ Alfr]d,harjdt The same is often 

true of suffixes bearing secondary stress, as hgd, hgd which are 
regularly long, and ddvi, gre, tgs, Uke {liche) which are sometimes 
short, however. The length is proved by doubling of vowels, as in 
hood, heed, doom, lees, and the occasional shortening by such spellings 
of the suffixes as dam, less. Prefixes with original long vowels show 
shortening in Middle English, as arisen ^ arise,' iofgre ‘before,' 
from OE. prefixes a and id. In the case of id- the spelling clearly 
indicates occasional shortening, as well as variation in quality; 
cf. iegadere (gidere), ieday ‘together, today.' Yet these are on 
the whole rare forms, and the probability is that the prefix id- was 
associated with the preposition-adverb id and was usually regarded 
as long. The same is true of vowels in words unstressed in the 
sentence, as an {a), hui (hoi\ any (e^y), nai {noi), }}oh (though), us, 
sholde, wolde, wel beside wel, &c. 

Note. — In early Midland the long quantity is retained, as shown by Orm’s 
orthography in had, dom, iSs ‘ less,’ ivfs ‘ wise,’ rede. Ilk {like) ‘ like,* often 
Ire, though the latter is sometimes shoit. So also i (y), from OE. ig, as in 
hdlT^, dodo, and the second elements of compounds as CBd(d)mddnesse, where 
mod is long as indicated by the single d following the vowel. Shortening of 
vowels in words unstressed in tlie sentence is also shown in Orm’s hutt, uss, 
pohh, ann(a), See. 

83. Other changes in unstressed syllables are those called syncope, 
apocope, aphaeresis, elision, contraction, the occurrence of which 
follows general laws that may be briefly summarized. To begin 



Ivm GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 

with, every vowel or diphthong, whether medial or final, makes a 
syllable except as noted hereafter. But unstressed syllables, that 
is those without principal or secondary stress, often show syncope 
of medial <?. Thus, after an accented syllable, medial e, whatever its 
origin, is syncopated, as in chirche ‘church,’ hevne ‘heaven,' lernde 
‘ learned,' gpnen ‘ open.' In many such cases, however, the synco- 
pated e is restored by analogy of unsyncopated forms, as chireche^ 
hiven€^ leTfieds, gpenen. The same is true of medial £ between a 
principal and secondary stress, as trew^, sem^, Englgnd, beside 
irewdy, semely, Engeignd. Syncope of any other vowel than e is 
rare, though t in the suffixes ij, tsh is sometimes lost. 

Note.— Early Midland shows the same syncope in many cases, as in Orm’s 
effne^ errnde^ gc^drenn, heffiidfOp^itenn^ &c., while in other forms the loss has 
not occurred. 

S4. Medial e is sometimes syncopated or partially lost in certain 
endings. Syncopation frequently occurs before final r, /, as in 
silv(p)r, hung{i)r, sirw{e)n, Tit{e)l It is especially common between 
a vowel or liquid and n, as in the past participles drawn, siqyn, horn, 
torn. In past participles of weak verbs, the ending ed shows 
similar syncopation sometimes, owing to such a change in Old 
English (Sievers, ‘ Gr.,' § 406), though unsyncopated forms also 
occur. Syncopation seldom occurs in the endings esi, ep {etA) of 
the present indicative ; in es [zs) of the genitive singular, the 
nominative plural, and the adverb ; in en of the infinitive, the plural 
of verbs, and in other forms except the past participle of strong 
verbs; in ed of preterit singular and plural, and er, est of com- 
parative and superlative in adjectives. Syncope often occurs in 
words unstressed in the sentence, as arn for dren ‘ are,' wiln {woln) 
for zvzlkn (puollen) ‘ will.' 

Note i. — In early Midland syncope is less common except in the verbal 
endings est, ep{eth\ in which it is sometimes found. Compare Orm*s se^^st 
‘sayest,' ‘ sayeth.' 

Note 2. — In addition to general agreement with Midland, Nth. shows 
.syncope in es of nouns and verbs. Sth., while also sliowing general agreement 



GRAMMA TICAL INTRODUCTION Ik 

with Midland, differs in a much more frequent syncopation of <jin the est, ep 
(eiA) verbal endings, as in Old English. 

85. When medial e, of whatever origin, is followed by a syllable 
with another unstressed <?, syncope or apocope often takes place. 
This gives rise to double forms, such as apel, ap{e)le ‘ noble ’ ; adys^ 
ad{e)se ‘adze’; ever, ev{e)re ‘ever’; many also in inflexion, as 
loved, lov(e)de ‘loved’; hevens, hev{e)nes ‘heavens.’ In the last 
half of the fourteenth century, apocope of e is preferred in preterits 
of weak verbs, the latter thus agreeing with the past participle. 
Upon this apocope and consequent agreement between preterit 
and past participle, rests the regularity of Modern English forms. 

Note i. — In early Midland the same variation between syncope or apocope 
also occurs, as in Orm’s heffne ‘ heaven,’ dpell ‘ noble,’ but lufede ‘ loved.’ 

Note 2. — In Nth. the final e is usually silent or has suffered apocope. Sth. 
seems to prefer syncope of medial Chaucer makes frequent use of both 
forms for the same word, no doubt for metrical purposes. 

86. Apocope of final e is common in Middle English, and 
materially affects the spoken forms of words, whether indicated or 
not by the orthography. It occurred earliest in polysyllables after 
a strong secondary stress, as in almess, OE. celmesse ‘ alms ' ; lafdi) 
(Jivdif), OE. hlcBfdige ‘ lady ’ ; and in inflected forms of such words 
as drinking, wurpi^ ‘ worthy,’ iwenti^ ‘ twenty.’ On the other hand, 
some such words occasionally assumed an inorganic e in the 
nominative by analogy of other forms, instead of suffering apocope 
in the latter, as fipende ‘ tidings,’ iwifalde ‘ twofold.’ Similar apocope 
often occurred in words not bearing principal stress in the sentence, 
as in pronouns, unstressed adverbs and conjunctions, and auxiliary 
verbs. Examples are myn, hir, swich {such), whan, pan {than), 
shul, myp, beside forms with e in which the spelling is often merely 
traditional. Total or partial apocope, that is slurring, also occurs 
in poetry when unstressed ne, pe {the), a precede words beginning 
with a vowel, as proved by the metre. 

Note i,-~In early Midland, syncope is already clear from such cases as 
Orm’s drinnkinng and others ; unstressed words as an, all, min, pm ; 

and such evidences of elision as parrke ‘ ihe ark,’ 



lx GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 

Note 2. — ^In the earliest Nth. apocope has taken place even more commonly 
than in other dialects ; compare § 6. Sth. is far more conservative, witu lUe 
exception of Kentish, which does not differ from Midland. 

87. After syllables bearing principal stress, final e-j of whatever 
origin, tends to disappear in Middle English, sometimes through 
analogy, later especially through general weakening. At the 
beginning of the period, the beginning of the thirteenth century, 
final e is usually retained except as already noted. About 1300 it 
remains or disappears at the pleasure of the writer, as shown by 
poetry, and in late Middle English, that is about the middle of the 
fifteenth century, it is wholly lost. Texts written in the northeast 
Midland district show disappearance of final e before those of the 
southeast Midland, 

Note I'.—In early Midland final e was still preserved as a rule, though lost 
in words not hearing sentence stress, and in some inflexional forms as the 
dative of nouns. 

Note 2 . —In Nth. final e was wholly lost by the middle of the fourteenth 
century, a centuiy before it disappeared entirely in Midland. It remained 
longest in the adjective inflexion, less commonly in nouns and verbs. In Sth., 
except Kentish, final e was kept somewhat longer than in Midland, though 
sometimes silent in the fourteenth century. In Kentish it is generally kept as 
late as the middle of the fourteenth century. In the dialect of London it is also 
retained somewhat longer than usually in Midland, as shown by the writings of 
Chaucer, in which, though often silent, it may still form a syllable for metrical 
purposes at the pleasure of the writer. 

88. Elision of weak final e occurs before a word beginning with 
a vowel or weak h, that is h in unstressed w^ords as he, him, or those 
with French h. Examples are numerous in poetry, as indeed they 
are rarely found in Old English verse. The commonest OE. elision, 
that of e in the negative ne, remains to Middle English in such 
forms as nas for ne was, &c. In Middle English also e of ]?e {the) 
is often elided. This is shown by such early Midland forms as 
pempence ' the empress ' in the ' Chronicle,' and parrke ' the ark ' in 
the ' OiTOiuIum.' Common also is elision of 0 in unstressed id, as 
in ioffrenn ‘ to offer,' iunnderrgdn ' to undergo ' from the ^ Ormulum.’ 
Rarely the e of the pronouns me, pi (thee) also suffers elision, as in 
ihalighie 'thee alight,' do mendyie 'do me endyte.' 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


bd 


89. Aphaeresis, that is loss of an initial vowel (or s} liable), some- 
times occurs in unstressed words or s}dlables. Examples in un- 
stressed words are het for he if, was/ for was it. So also the un- 
stressed vowel has disappeared in risen from OE. drisan ^ arise/ 
iaunen from OE. ceieawnian ' show/ iwzien from OE. ociwiian ^ twit/ 
Similarly i {y) from OE. ge usually suffers aphaeresis in Northern 
and Midland, though often not in Southern. Old French e before 
sc {sk\ sp, st is often lost as in spyen ^ espie, spy/ spouse, sidt ^ state,’ 
stgrie (pigry), scdpen ‘escape/ Aphaeresis of a, e under other 
circumstances also occurs sometimes, as prentys ‘apprentice,’ 
semhlee ‘ assembly,' nuien {noien) ‘ annoy/ pisile ‘ epistle/ Aphaeresis 
of an unstressed syllable in Romance w^ords occurs in sample <en- 
sample, huschment<,emhuschment, fenden<^defenden, sport <. desport, 
slruien < desiruien. 

90. Contraction of vowels brought together by vocalization of a 
medial consonant sometimes occurs. Examples are del for devel, 
el for eml, yede {yddc) from OE. ge-eode^ wher for wheper, gr {or) for 
ouper ‘or,’ er, nlr for ever, never ^ 

The Consonants 

gi. The Middle English consonant system may be best exhibited 





Ixii GRAMMA TICAL INTRODUCTION 

To these must be added the breath consonant k, and the combina- 
tions hw (MnE. wh as in what), ck {^=:tsh) as in churchy g, j 
{=zdzh) as in wage, judge, x is but a sign for ks. 

Note, — The pronunciatioa of most of the consonants is the same as in 
Modern English. The palatal stops k',g' are pronounced as in kid, get, com- 
pared with the guttural stops in cot, got. The voiced/ (i?, th') is sounded as in 
the. Sh (sch) represents the simple consonant sound in she, no voiced variety 
being found in Middle English. The palatal spirant I (^h) has the sound of ch 
in Ger. ich, the voiced ^ (medial and only in early Middle English) may be 
pronounced as y in yet. The guttural spirants represent respectively the 
Ger. ch in auch, and g in sagen. ij represents the sound of n before k or g. 

92. The general relations to the Old English consonant system 
may be briefly summarized ; compare also a table similar to the 
above in Sievers, ^Gr./ § 1^0. In the first place, most consonants 
in Middle English correspond to similar ones in Old English on 
the one side, and in Modern English on the other. Especially is 
this true of the semi-vowels, liquids, and nasals, as well as of the 
dental and labial stops and spirants. The most radical changes 
that have taken place have affected the palatal and guttural stops 
and spirants. In addition to this there are of course some minor 
changes within the limits of each consonant, which will be noticed 
as they occur. Owing to the general similarity between the Old, 
Middle, and Modem English consonant systems, however, it 
seems best here to presuppose knowledge of the Old English 
system, and to consider mainly those changes that are necessary 
for an understanding of Middle English proper. In considering 
the consonants, the order will be that of the table above, the stops 
first, and next the various classes of continuants, spirants, semi- 
vowels, liquids, and nasals h. 

^ This order is chosen as best exhibiting the essential character of the con- 
sonants on the physical, rather than the physiological side. The physiological 
terms, as gnttural, palatal, &c., and the descriptive terms, as semi-vowels, 
liquids, &c., are also freely employed because of their long acceptance and 
their general value. 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


Ixiii 


THE STOPS 

93, The Middle English voiceless and voiced stops of labial and 
dental varieties, p-h, i-d, correspond so nearly with those of Old 
and Modern English that little space need be given to them. Each 
is a stable consonant in the main, and subject only to such changes 
as may affect any consonant at different times; see § iia f. 
It is worthy of note that the voiceless labial p, which was rare 
initially in Old English, became common owing to the great number 
of French words introduced in Middle English. The geminated 
labial 3 , when medial as in a few OE. words, was replaced by v 
under the influence of the numerous forms in which v (OE. medial f) 
occurred in Old English. Examples are h&ven^ OE. hahhan * have/ 
liven^ OE. lihhan ‘ live/ hiven, OE. hthhan ^ heave.' For d under 
grammatical change see § ii6. 

Note. — The dialects in general agree. In late Nth., final unstressed ^was 
often unvoiced to /, and this has remained to modem Scotch, In Sth. geminated 
hb as above was not replaced by v. Early Sth. shows unvoicing of final un- 
stressed as in o^ket * asked/ iowart ^ toward/ inempnet ‘ named,' but later d 
was restored by analogy of other forms. 

94. The ME. voiceless palatal stop k (as in kid) springs from 

the OE. guttural stop c from Norse and in a few words from 
OF. c It occurs initially before the OE. palatal mutated 

vowels p,e< 0, sometimes (2, usually before the OE. guttural y (from 
u) which had become palatal z by unrounding, before e, i in words 
from Norse (rarely Old French), and sometimes by analogy of 
guttural vowels in allied forms. Examples of native words are 
ME. kemben "comb,' Kent, kern "keen/ kei (OE. mge) "key/ 
Mchm (OE, cycem) "kitchen/ kite (OE. cyia) "kite/ A consider- 
able number of Norse words also occur, as ketel " kettle/ kevel " bit, 
clamp, gag,' hide ‘kid/ kindlen ‘kindle/ kirke ‘church.' On the 
other hand, OF. words with palatal k are limited by rare occur- 
rence of OF. c (=^), except before gutturals, but compare AN. 
forms with e <ehy monophthonging of OF. ue (§ 35, 20), which 
account for ME. keveren beside coveren " cover,' and keverchef 



bdv GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 

{kerche/^ Here belong also ME. kenet Miound,' henel ‘bennel/ 
kiidn ‘ kitten.’ By analogy of guttural k in pret. pi. and past parti- 
ciple, the palatal stop h took the place of ME. ch in the present 
of kerven ‘ carve.’ Medially the ME. palatal stop k appears as 
above, as well as before OE. a, o, u, which had become ME. e in 
unstressed syllables (§ 8o). Examples are taken, mdkcn, dker 
'acre.’ By analogy of the indicative present third singular of 
certain verbs as sekep, wirke}?, palatal k often appears in the infini- 
tive and other present forms, as seken, wz'rken. In chiken ' chicken/ 
tsikel 'icicle,’ the k is doubtless due to the OE. inflected forms, as 
cycnes, Isikles in which OE. c would remain k. The combination 
5 * + palatal c {—k) always indicates borrowing, as in ' reason,’ 
sMn, skere ‘ clear.’ 

Note.— The examples of palatal ( (i) are increased for the Nth. dialect by 
the lack of palatalization of OE. <r to ch (§ no, n. 2). Examples are mikel 
'much,’ swilk ‘ such,’ Ilk ‘ like,’ sek ‘ seek,’ wirk ‘ work,’ and many others. For 
Nth. s < OE. sc, cf. § 102, n. 2. 

95. The voiced palatal stop g springs from OE. guttural g 
before 'y which had become palatal z by unrounding, from OF., 
ON. g before palatal vowels, and is sometimes due to analogy of 
allied forms with guttural g. Examples of mitial g in native words 
are gilden ‘gild,’^f/f, ‘guilt,’ girden ‘gird’; in those from Old 
French, where g represents earlier gu, gik ‘ guile,’ gimelot {gimheht) 
‘ gimblet,’ gilerne ‘ guitar ’ ; in Norse, g^e ‘ gear,’ g^ren ‘ do, make,’ 
gil ‘ gill of a fish,’ gist ‘ guest,’ the last supplanting the native Eng- 
lish word. Analogy of g in preterit and past participle accounts 
for geom (given) ‘give’ beside English jeven (^pven) a.nd ginnen, 
beginnen ‘begin,’ while geien beside ^eten ‘get’ is of Norse origin. 
Medially, palatal^ appears in the combination ng {=pd-g') before 
palatal vowels, as singen (OE. singan) ‘sing,’ gengen {Oi^.gmga) 
‘ go/ genge (ON. gengi) ‘ company.’ 

g6. The Middle English guttural stops c {k)-g correspond to 
OE. (ON.) guttural stops c-g in Teutonic words, or to similar 
sounds in Old French. Both guttural stops occur before conso- 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION Ixv 

nants and the guttural vowels a, o, u. For the stops c {k)-g 
which occur before OE. I, y, sometimes ^ when due to mutation, 
see § 94, and for OF. ch before au^ see § no. The guttural c 
(i) also appears in the combination .a; qu nc {k) 

=^-f and the stop^ in the combination occasionally 

in gemination {gg)- Guttural c {k) initially in Teutonic words 
may be illustrated by clgj? ‘ cloth,' cCxre (kare\ cgld^ cgle ' coal,' cumen 
(comen) ' come,' and in Romance words by cryeJi * cry/ cas (case) 
' case,' colur ' colour,' ciirs {cours) ‘ course.' In Romance words the 
stop c (^) before <2, aii indicates learned origin or Norman-Picard 
dialect, in which vulgar Latin k did not become ch (as in Central 
French). Examples are cas (case), cause, cage, carpenter, and the 
doublets caigl, cachen ‘ catch,' calice, cariie, beside OF. ckaiel, chdeen, 
chaUce, chariie (cf. § no). Medially the guttural stop c {k) appears 
before a guttural vowel in syllables having principal or secondary 
stress, and finally after a guttural vowel. Between a guttural and 
palatal vowel, the stop must have varied between guttural and 
palatal quality as it belonged to the syllable with one vowel or the 
other. The combination s + guttural c {k) always indicates borrow- 
ing, either from Norse as in scowl, scull, bask, Old French as in 
scorn, scuren, ^ scour ' semie ‘ scout,’ or other minor sources. 

Notk. — I n Nth. the number of guttural l^s is increased by the fact that OE. 
c did not become ck in that dialect (§ 94, n.). Examples are caf ‘ chaff,* 
calk ‘ chalk,’ For the combination sk < OK sc in unstressed words, see, 
§ 102, n. 2. 

97. The guttural stop g initially may be exemplified by grene 
* green,' galle "gall,' gold, god "good,' gume "man' in Teutonic 
words, and glgru, governen " govern,' gmte " gout ’ in Romance. In 
Teutonic words borrowed by vulgar Latin initial w became gu 
\^gw),. and this combination became guttural g in Old French, as 
in ME. garde, garison, regard, while remaining w (except before t) 
in Anglo-Norman, and therefore appearing in the doublets warde, 
warism, reward (§ 106). Before i, g < Teut. w appears in ^dexi 
" guide,' gtse • guise,' gVe " guile,' begilen " beguile.' Medially and* 

e 



CRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


Ixvi 

finally guttural g occurs under the same circumstances as guttural 
k above. In a few cases ME. guttural g represents late OE. gemi- 
nated, that is bng^ {gg), as in dogge ^ dog^ frogge ‘ frog/ hogge 
‘ hog,' stagge ' stag/ Usually, however, medial or final guttural g 
implies borrowing, as in draggen 'drag,' hig^ egg, legg from Norse. 
ME. sugre, beside sucre ' sugar/ shows voicing of OF. c to g. ME. 
garden represents Picard beside OY, jar din, 

THE SPIRANTS 

98. The spirants f-v (/) in Teutonic words occurred under the 
same conditions as in Old English and to-day. The voiceless y* 
appears initially in a stressed syllable, as in fader ' father, lefgren 
‘ before ' ; medially when preceding a voiceless consonant or in 
gemination (jf ), as in shaft, offren ' offer ’ ; finally, as in wulf self 
In Romance words ywas regularly voiceless and retained this quality 
whether in stressed or unstressed syllables. Examples of Romance 
words in which y* appears contrary to the rule in Teutonic are 
comfort, irufie. 

99. The voiced spirant v (sometimes written f) in Teutonic 
words springs from OE. (ON.) f in voiced company, as g'ver , given 
(jiven, yzven') ‘give ' ; occasionally also in inflected forms with final 
yin nominative singular, as staves from staf^ staff,' calves from calf 
To these were added in Middle English many v^s, both initial and 
medial, from Old French. As initial v did not occur in Teutonic 
words, except rarely in those borrowed from the Sth. dialect, Mid- 
land words with initial v or with v beginning a stressed syllable are 
of Romance origin, as vine, devtne. 

Note i. — I n early Middle English y was stUl written for v, as in the OE. 
penod ; cf. idfen{^^^dmii), kafen ^ have,’ &c. 

Note — Nth. agrees with Midland. In Sth. the number of initial vh was 
largely increased by the voicing of initial/, as in voder * father/ vihien ‘ fight.’ 
Cf. Et, selections especially, 

roo. The spirants / yoiceless and voiced without distinct 

tion of written sign, occurred in Teutonic words under exactly the 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


Ixvii 


same circumstances as /-v^ and need not be especially illustrated. 
While in Modern English some borrowed words have the voiceless 
ih, the voiced and voiceless spirants usually indicate Teutonic origin. 
In late Middle English ih came to be written for OF. / 
as in ih^aire^ ihiorie^ iheme, ihrpne, authmr ^ author/ and these were 
doubtless still pronounced with / until, in Modern English, they 
acquired the spirant sound by influence of the spelling. , There is 
no evidence that initial p (pJi) had become voiced in pronominal 
words, as pe^ pat^ pis^ pu^ &C., or final p in unstressed wip. Initial 
unstressed p in pronominal words often becomes* t after d, /, some- 
times s by back assimilation, as in and iat ^ and that,' at tat ‘ at 
that,' is iat ‘ is that.' Occasionally ME. p interchanges with the 
voiced stop d in medial position, as cmde beside coupe ^ could,' 
aforden ‘ afford,' and finally in the preterit quod ‘ quoth.' After 
a voiceless spirant, yj j (/^), ME. p becomes /, as in pefte ^ theft,' 
Uste (OE. lots pe) Mest,' hd)te ‘height' 

. Note. — Nth. agrees with Midland. The parallel voicing in Sth. of initial 
/, j, sometimes wk (Jiw) to w, implies voicing of/ in similar position, but the 
orthography gives no evidence of it. 

loi. The spirants j*, voiced and voiceless, but usually without 
distinction of written sign, are parallel to f-v in their occurrence in 
Teutonic words. The voiced spirant is usually written s, z ordi- 
narily indicating is in Middle English, z is found, especially when 
final in unstressed syllables, as in WMl. forms like sidez ‘ sides/ 
indicating the voicing of j in this position. Both spirants were 
largely increased from Old French sources. OF. voiceless s 
(written ^ (i'r) ss, or c before <?, t) occurs in all positions and need 
hot be especially illustrated. Medial OF. iss usually became ME. 
iscp {issh) as in finischen (OF. - finir^ finiss-') ‘ finish,' perischen 
‘ perish,' anguische ‘ anguish.' OF. voiced s is found in such words 
as prisun. ‘ prison,' irgson ‘ treason.' In cUesm ‘ citizen ' the voiced 
spirant has been inserted, perhaps by analogy of similar sen ^zenj 
forms. For Picard ch in words with OF. c-=.s cf. § no; 

, Note. — In general Nth. agrees with Midland, but note Nth. s for Ml. Sth, 



Ixviii 


grammatical introduction 


sck (sh), § 102. For OF. sire Nth. has sckir sometimes. Teutonic initial 
s was voiced in Sth., as shown especially hy initial s in the Kentish ‘ Ayenbite 
of Inwit/ 

loa. The Middle English spirant sck {sk) is a characteristic 
ME. sound springing from OE. sc in all positions. Examples are 
scka/i {shaft) ‘shaft,’ schorl {shorT), ascAe ‘ash,’ Englisch, fisch 
(Jish) From such strictly English words with ME. sch (sk) are to 
be separated the Norse and OF. borrowed words with sc (sh ) ; but 
medial OF. us gave ME. !sck (ish) as already noted. In the pro- 
noun schS (scho, sfw) ME. sch springs from OE. s+y{<e) in un- 
stressed seo (seo) from OE. seo. In ashen ‘ ask ’ (OE. asctan, axian), 
sk probably represents a late metathesis of u;. Scotland, ScoUtsch, 
seal ‘ school,’ are doubtless learned forms, the first two influenced 
by the Nth. Scot, the last by OF. escole or mediaeval Latin scola. 
There was no corresponding voiced spirant in Middle English. 

Note i. In ‘ Chronicle,’ sc is still written for ME. sch (sh), but Onn writes 

sh after long, ssh after short vowels. 

Note 2 . — Nth. agrees with Ml. in the main, but OE. sc in unstressed words 
and syllables became s^ as in sitlen, sal, suld, ‘ schulen, shall, should,’ Tnghs, 
‘English/ ‘Scotch/ In Sth., sometimes ML, ss {$) are written for the 
spirant, sound, 

103. The Middle English palatal spirants } (Ky-j {3k), voiceless 
and voiced without much distinction of signs, are exclusively of 
Teutonic origin and of limited occurrence. They cannot occur 
initially because the corresponding OE. palatals c, g had become 
ME. ch, and the semivowel 3 (jf) respectively. They are also 
limited, in medial and final position, by their vocalization to form 
diphthongs (§ 47), or ?, u (§ 75 )- While this vocalization was 
probably complete in early Middle English, as shown by the spell- 
ing of Orm (§ 71, n.), the signs were still sometimes written as Aek 
(ATg, %) ‘ high,' le3en \le3Aen) ‘ lay.’ Otherwise the voiceless spirant 
y (A) is found only medially in the OE. combinations At, hp, which 
both became ^/, written also M irA f >^4 less commonly y/i; 

gth, ctA. Examples are rsy (rtki) ‘right,’ hni3t (hniAt) ‘knight,’ 
Jr^ten (a 7 -ito) ‘ lord,’ and Ae3te {Ae3t, ht3t) ‘height,’ ‘sight,’ 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION Ixix 

with change of ^ to / in accordance with § loo. WE. p is some- 
times written sf by confusion of these high-pitched palatal sounds. 
The OE. combination rhj> had become as in mirpe ^ mirth/ and 
such forms as WE.fe ^ money, fee/ spring from OE. forms which 
had lost the final as feo beside feoh ; cf. also ME. p^^r beside 
pi/rj {purh) ‘through.* The voiced palatal spirant j {p) is found 
medially as above until fully vocalized after vowels to form diph- 
thongs, after r or z to z, as mirie (OE. myrge^ myrige) ‘ merry/ hirien 
(OE. hyrgati) ‘ bury,* slpe (OE. sigepe) ‘ scythe,* dne (OE. dryge) 
‘ dry.* Finally in stressed syllables the voiced spirant had probably 
become unvoiced, but in unstressed zj (OE. ig^ the voiced spirant 
also became J, as in hodi {dody\ hgR {hpy). ME. beB (OE. belg^ 
belig) no doubt comes from the form with parasitic z* compared 
with that with^ which gave w after I as in ME. helwe (pehii) ‘bellows.* 

Note i. — In early Ml. the voiceless spirant is still spelt h as in Old 
English, and the voiced spirant ih as in Orm. 

Note 2. — The dialects agree in general, though in Nth. OE. lit remained 
guttural as in Northumbrian. Sth. has a larger number of palatal spirants, 
owing to the larger number of palatal vowels in that dialect, as le^hen {lichen) 
from WS. hliehan, beside Ml. lahhen (Jauhwetty lauwen) from OM. hlahkan 
* laugh.* Sth. also retains t from OE. ig in the present tense of OE. weak 
verbs of the second class (§ 6). 

104. The Middle English guttural spirants } {k, jh)-} (^^), 
voiceless and voiced without much distinction of signs, are also 
of Teutonic origin and of as limited occurrence as the palatal 
spirants. They cannot occur initially because not so appearing in 
Old English, OE. guttural spirant g having become a guttural stop 
before ME. times. While occurring in medial and final position 
they later became vocalized after vowels to form diphthongs (§47), 

the voiced spirant became w after I or after u was absorbed 
(§ The voiceless y remained voiceless throughout the period 
only in the OE. combination hi, as in iayk {iauhie) ‘taught,* 
douper ^ foupm ‘ fought,* pmp ‘ thought' When final 

it remained voiceless until finally vocalized in the preceding diph- 
thong which ha 4 been formed, (§ My Examples are pek {pmp 



Ixx GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 

‘though/ sloh islouf) ‘%\f^:’purh (Mj) ‘through.’ The OE. 
medial voiceless guttural hh became voiced and developed as the 
voiced guttural through to w, as in lau^en [lauwen) ‘ laugh, 
{couwen) ‘ cough.’ The preterit singular saw has its w from 
the plural sawen (OE. sSwon), and {J/oro^) developed from 
J>oruj beside /'urj. The medial voiced spirant J remained as j (jh) 
until vocalized after vowels to form diphthongs, after u to strengthen 
the preceding vowel, after 7 , r, to w. Examples are drajen {drawen) 
‘ draw,’ g^en {pwen) ‘ fu^sl (^fuel, fowet) < OE. fugel ‘ fowl, 
/b/jsfi {/olwen) ‘follow,’ scr^e {sorwe) < OE. sorh, f., ‘.sorrow.’ 
When final, the original voiced spirant had become voiceless and 
fell in with that sound as above. Examples are dou^ ‘dough,’ 
plou} ‘ plow.’ Such forms as ME. scho ‘ shoe ’ rest upon the forms 
which had lost final h in Old English, as sco beside scdli (cf. § 103). 

■ - Note t. In $arly ML k was still written for the voiceless guttural, and 

g for the voiced : cL, however, halecJun for more regular Jial^en 

ihalwen) ^ saints’, haUchede hal^ede {halwede) ^hallowed ’ of ‘ Chronicle.’ 

Note 2. — The dialects agree. 

THE CONSONANT H AND ITS COMBINATIONS 

105. The ME. breath consonant h, essentially a spirant of 
palatal or guttural character, occurs in general as in Old and 
Modern English, that is only in initial position, or initially in the 
Second element of compounds- It had been regularly lost, however, 
from the OE. initial combinations hly hr, hn, as in 1 ^pe?i, 'leap/ 
ring, nuk ' nut,’ and sometimes also initially in unstressed words as 
a for OE. hiL In unstressed syllables it regularly disappeared as 
in fosirild < OE. */osiorhiId 'nurse/ OF. k, in words of Teutonic 
origin, falls in with OE., ON. h, as in hardl, harneis 'harness.’ In 
words of Latin origin h, though frequently written by scribes, was 
not pronounced. This accounts for the double forms eremite-^ 
hermit, ahii-hahit, onour-honour. The OE. combination hw was- 
retained in Middle English, though early written wh as by Orm, 
s/ionetimes with the characteristic Nth. qu as in ' Genesis and Exodus.’- 



GRAMMA TICAL INTR CD UCTION Ixxi 

Occasionally wh {^zv) is reduced to as in ho for who (§ io6). 
In OE. heo initial h became as ^ho 'she/ 

Note. — Nth. agrees with Ml. as to h, but uses qu {qtih) for wh^ showing 
a strengthening of the original hw to kw, Sth. shows a more frequent loss of 
initial as in ^ for OE. he, heo^ and abben ‘ have.’ In Kt. the orthography /h, 
nh for OE. hl^ hn-, perhaps indicates a retention of the original combinations. 


THE SEMIVOWELS, LIQUIDS AND NASALS 

106. The ME. semivowel w, which appears only in Teutonic 
words, though a few are from Romance sources, springs from OE. 
though limited by its vocalization to form diphthongs (§ 47), To 
words with OE., ON. w were added a few from Anglo-Norman 
which had retained an original Teut. w instead of the usual OF. gu> 
Examples of the latter are waiten 'wait/ wafre 'wafer/ wage^ 
walop, werre 'war/ werreien [werrien) 'make war/ Teut. w was 
not retained before i and hence an OF. g appears in such words 
as in § 97. In Teut. words w disappears between an initial con- 
sonant and a following 0 {u), as in /o beside /zvo ‘ two, ^ J>png beside 
pwgng 'thong,' soie beside swdie 'sweet,' ho beside who ipwo) 
' who.' In sg, alsg, the disappearance of w was earlier than in the 
other words, perhaps as early as late Old English (cf. § 42). w 
also disappears initially in a few unstressed words of common 
breath groups, as nas for ne was, nere for ne were, mile for ne wille, 
ngf for fte wgt, God gt {God wgf)^ OE. cw, ON. kv {=zkw) were 
generally written ^u, under French influence, and with them fell in 
OF. words with gu together with a few with OF. c (==k) + ue, ui as 
quire 'choir,' squiere {squire), squireL For AN. queint, aqueinten 
see § 53. Similarly gu .{^gw) springs from OF. g-^ue, ui in 
anguische 'anguish/ 

Note. — The dialects agree, but Nth. also has qu (quh) for OE. hw, and w 
was preserved in ^2va, qu^, &c. in which OE. d had not become p (^). 

107. The ME. semivowel 7 {j') is exclusively of Teutonic origin, 
and springs from the OE. semivowel^ as in jer jbke 'yoke/ 
yu?ig {yong) 'young/ or the OE. palatal spirant g as in jeldeu 



Ixxii 


GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


‘ yield/ {^ard) ^yard.’ Before z*, OE. g is sometimes vocalized 
as in icchen (fyR* gycceati) ^ iic^y Ipswich (OE. Gipeswic\ Ilchesler 
(OE. Gifelceaster), and in unstressed isikel (OE. zsgiceT) ‘icicle.’ 
Similarly in the OE. unstressed prefix ge also became i though 
regularly preserved only in Sth. ME. y sometimes develops initially 
' before a palatal vowel as in ^ork (OE. Eofonvic\ }du {you) from 
OE. eow, the latter perhaps by influence of {ye) ‘ye.' 

108. The ME. liquids /, r, do not differ in general from their 
Teutonic or OF. originals. In OE, words I disappears before and 
after ch, as in swich, such (OE. swilc) ‘ such/ which (OE. hwilc), 
^ch (OE. me) ‘each/ iniiche beside muchel (OE. my cel), wenche 
beside wenchel (OE. wencel). The combination rid sometimes 
becomes rd in werde ‘ world.' The OE. metathesis of r remains 
in Middle English, and some new examples of metathesis appear as 
/resell, preschen ‘ thresh.’ Double forms of some OF. words are 
found, owing to OF. double forms as marbre’-marble^purpre-Tpurple. 

Note. — In Nth., / before k does not disappear as before the corresponding 
(h in the other dialects ; cf. swilk, quilk ‘such, which.’ 

109. The ME. nasals m, n, y {^n before k ox g) do not differ 
from their Teutonic and OF. originals, so far as preserved, OE. 
final unstressed m in inflexional endings had become n in late Old 
English, ME. final unstressed n in similar position or in un- 
stressed words tends to disappear throughout the period. This 
affects especially the en of verbal endings, and such unstressed 
words as an (a), gn (p), ngn {n/j, huten {bule, but) ‘ but.' Some 
stressed words show a similar loss at times, as morwe{n), gdme{n), 
viaide{n), gpe{n), seveiy). 

Note. — In Nth. infinitives no final n was received from OE. times. This 
indicates the beginning of the tendency to lose inflexional n, a tendency that 
was more pronounced and rapid than in Ml., far more than in Sth, 

THE AFFRICATIVE COMBINATIONS 

no. The ME. combination ch, as in church {ish), occurs in native 
and Romance words. In native words it springs from the OE, 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


Ixxiii 


palatal stop c {cc) before palatal vowels, as initially in chirche^ child^ 
chesie, cherl, cherren ^ turn,^ chese ^ cheese,^ chaf ‘ chaff' ; medially 
in ivrecclie ‘ wretch,' sfeche ‘ speech.' After a palatal vowel OE. c 
became ME. ch when final in unstressed words and syllables, as in 
ich ^\^whichy swich ‘such,' Ipeswich^ Ipswich'; sometimes in stressed 
words as lick ‘ body,'/f(r^ ‘ pitch/ French^ owing to inflected forms 
with OE. c in medial position or possibly in some cases to analogy 
of corresponding verbal roots. By analogy also ch appears in chgsen, 
pp. for OE. coren. On the other hand ch is replaced by the palatal 
stop k in the infinitive and other present forms of some verbs by 
analogy of the pres. 3rd sg., which had no ch ; examples are sekm 
beside sechen ‘ seek/ wirhn (wz'rchen) * work.’ In Romance words 
ch appears before au in those from Central French, before i 
in those from the Picard dialect, beside NF. c (U) for the former 
and ^ (=j) for the latter. Examples are charnie^ charge, chawige, 
chaumbre^prgehm ‘preach,' aprgehm ‘approach,’ cherzscken ‘cherish,’ 
chisel, chimeneie ‘chimney.' For doublets with NF. c {=h) beside 
OF. chi and OF. c (=j) beside Picard ch, see §§ 96, loi. For 
OE. palatal c, see § 102. 

Note i, — In ‘Chronicle/ c is still written for OE. Cy hut Onn uses ch which 
continnes to prevail. 

Note 2. — As Old Northumbrian suffered no palatalization of OE. c. Nth, 
has c {h) in place of Ml. Sth, ch; cf. caf ‘chaff,* calk * chalk,’ mikel, ik 
‘I,’ quilk ‘which/ swilk ‘such,' sek ‘seek/ wirk ‘work’ (§ 94, n.). Sth., 
on the other hand, shows a greater number of ch forms, owing to the greater 
number of palatal spirants in West Saxon ; cf. Sth. ch^ld (chald) ‘ cold ’ from WS. 
cealil, with Ml. Nth. cgld fxom OAng. cd/d, and muchelml^ ch after an original 
guttural vowel. 

III. The ME. voiced combination g {/), as in judge {dzh), 
corresponding to the voiceless ch above, occurs also in native and 
Romance words. In native words it springs only from the OE. 
voiced palatal stop g in gemination {cg^ or in the combination ng 
{j=:n'\-dzh). Examples are brigge ‘bridge/ egge ‘edge,’ hegge 
‘hedge,’ sen^n {sirgm) ‘singe/ crin^en ‘cringe.' As the OE. 
Gomtbinations eg, ng could not occur initially, most such words with 



Ixxiy 


GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


j {:=zdzh) are of Romance origin. OE. eg iege) in the present tense 
of verbs was displaced by analogy of the 3rd sg. in which g 
had not developed (cf. § 165). Examples are seien (seyen) ' say/ 
leien ‘ lay/ hyen ‘bu3^^ In Romance words ME. represents OF. 

as in geniil ^ gentle/ general^ geani {giant) ‘ giant/ joie * joy/ 
jfous ^jealous/ engin ^engine/ chargen ^ jnggen ‘judge/ 

edge, plegge ‘ pledge.' In proper names with initial / (/) in the 
MSS. it becomes difficult to determine accurately, especially in 
Biblical names, whether they are from Old French or adopted 
directly from Latin with initial /= JT. It seems safe to assume that 
OF. Biblical names only gradually displaced the OE. and Latin, 
such words as Jesus, Jghan ( Jghn), James, J or dan, Jerusalem being 
adopted before the more unusual as Joseph', cf. Orm's Joscep, and 
Idsep Joseph, Osip), idedh (Acdb) in ‘ Genesis and Exodus.^ 

Note. — Nth. shows no palatalization of OE. eg, ng and the voiced guttural 
stop therefore appears, as in hrig ' bridge/ lig ‘ lie/ Hg ‘ buy,' nmig ‘ mingle, 
disturb.’ Sth. retains the voiced affricative in verbs, as seg^n 'say/ dug^yn 
* buy.’ 


GENERAL CHANGES AFFECTING CONSONANTS 

II2. Certain general changes which affect consonants more or 
less regularly may best be treated together. The most important 
of these for Middle English, Vocalization, has already. been ex- 
plained as it affected the voiced spirants j {k), rarely v, and the 
semivowel w in the formation of diphthongs (§ 47). Similarly the 
voiced spirant y after % u was completely vocalized, causing com- 
pensatory lengthening when the preceding vowel was not long 
(§ 75) J 3 . 1 so the vocalization of j in the suffix (§ 103). 
Attention has also been called to the vocalization of the initial 
voiceless spirant y (=ji^) in § 107. Other consonants are more 
stable, but medial v is also vocalized in hast, hadde, and in OF. 
povre {pore ) ' poor/ The final voiceless f suffers the same change 
in the OF. ending if, as in laily beside lailif, joly beside jolif. 
Medial k is completely vocalized in made from makede, and d in 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


Ixxv 


disi for didesL The ME. ending we, from OE. ive, ge, during the 
period vocalizes to a syllable written oii {ow), as in sorow < earlier 
sorje {sorwe). Virtual vocalization in breath groups accounts for 
such forms as nille {ne tville), nas (jie was), np {ne wgt), § io6. 
The opposite tendency, Consonantizing, rarely occurs, and then 
only initially, Q.s^ork (OE. Eqforwic) ‘ York,’y^, § 107. 

Note. — N th. carries the vocalization of k, v still further, as in ia * take,’ 
idii ‘ taken,' ind ' make,’ hd ‘ have,’ gis * gives,’ and allied forms. 

113. Voicing and Unvoicing. The most noteworthy voicing of 
consonants in Middle English is the regular shift of initial /, }>, s, 
to V, voiced p, z in Sth. English. In Ml. the most common shifting 
was that of j to z in unstressed inflexional syllables of late Middle 
English, as indicated by the occasional spelling with 0. OE. 
medial hh must also have become voiced before developing into the 
second element of the diphthongs, § 104. Besides these, voicing is 
rare, as perhaps of OE. c {^) to g in ^bedgen, beggen if from OE. 
bedician, and OF. to ^ in sugr 'e ^ sugar, ^ graunie^i ^ grant.' OF. 
t became d in jupardy, diamaund ‘ diamond,’ waf'aund ' v arrant/ 
Unvoicing of to / occurs frequently in preterits of weak verbs 
ending in Id, rd, nd, vd, as bilk ' built,’ ‘girded, girt,' wenk 
‘went,’ lefk ‘left,’ and sometimes in past participles, as nempnef 
‘ named,’ ‘glanced,’ § 93 n. Unvoicing of initial OF. b \.o p 
appears in ptifkn (OF. bonier), purse, pudding (OF. boudin). 

114. Assimilation and Dissimilation. Assimilation is common, 
as in all periods. Thus jC becomes m before m, as in wimman 
(wummaii) from OE. wtfman, lemmafi from OE. leofman ; n becomes 
/ in elk < elne ‘ell,’ milk < milne (OE. mykn, my In). By partial 
assimilation the dental nasal n becomes the labial nasal m before 
a labial, as hemp, OE. henep, brimsign < ON. brennistdn, noumpire 
< OF. nonpere, comfort < OF. confort. Assimilation also accounts 
for the disappearance of h in viirpe < OE. myrhpe ‘ mirth,’ and 
c, g before p, t or d in lenten (leinkn) < kngten ‘ spring, dent,’ 
strenpe {sireinpe) < sirengpe, dreink < drenck ‘drenched,’ meinde < 
’mengde ‘ mingled.’ p in the combination rpf is assimilated and 



Ixxvi 


GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


disappears in Norfolk^ and p is assimilated to/* in Suffolk^ to s in 
Sussex, OE. Nordfolc, Sulffolc, Slid Seaxan. The stops are more 
stable, but t is assimilated to s in hlessen < OE. lleisian, lest < 
heist, last < *Iaisi, Essex < East Seaxan \ d becomes s in gossip, 
gospel < Godsib, Godspel, and by back assimilation in winnow 

< windwian. Back assimilation after d, t (j) also accounts for 
atie < at pe, and tat < and pat, is tat < is pat, wgsi u < wgst pu 
(§ loo). It is virtual assimilation also, when such a form as such 
results from switch through swuch. Dissimilation has often been 
limited to such substitution of I for r as in OF. purple < purpre. 
So 'ME, pilgrim iox peicrin. But aspirant has also been dissimilated 
to the corresponding stop, as ^ to / in the combination^, s, ^ {Ji) 
•\-p. Examples are pefle < OM. pe/pe {VIS. piefpe), leste < OE. 

Pp Ices pe, nostrils < nosepirles, sijte < OE. gesihp, heipte, OIM. 
hehpu (WS. hiehpu), slei^ie < ON. slmgp, ^sleight,' (cf. § loo). A 
voiced spirant p after the continuant r, especially before r, n {en), 
has become the voiced stop d as in murdre < OE. morpor, aforden 

< OE. afordian, hurdene beside hurpene < OE. hyrpen. 

Note. — I n the dialects such examples as Nth. s from OE. sc in unstressed 
words and syllables must be set down to assimilation ; cf. § 102, n. 2. 

115. Metathesis is occasional in hliddle English. Thus sk in the 
verb asken (OE, acsian, axtan) probably springs from a late 
metathesis of ks, since OE. sc would have given sch (sh). Meta- 
thesis of r appears in fresch ‘ fresh,’ preschen ^ thresh,’ but probably 
depends on OE. forms in gras, rinnen (rennen) ^ run.’ 

116. Substitution. One consonant seems to be substituted for 
another, though the cause is not clearly apparent, in coude < coupe 
'could,' quod < quop (OE. cwced). In the latter d must first have 
become voiced in the breath group between vowels, and the substi- 
tution in both cases may be due to the preference for a stop 
between continuants. By analogy of forms without grammatical 
change (Sievers, ' Gr./ § 233), consonants due to this influence are 
regularly replaced by their originals, but a few forms remain, as the 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


Ixxvii 


verb sepensoden (pt. and pp.), or the past participles used as adjec- 
tives, Igren (Jor'n)^forlgren {/orlorn\ cgren {ycgren) ' chosen/ 

117. Ecthlipsis. The loss of a consonant through assimilation 
has been illustrated. The most common case of loss under other 
circumstances is that of final unstressed inflexional mentioned in 
§ 109. Under a similar influence final n, which is not inflexional, 
is also lost in some. cases. Examples are a{n\ g{n\ morwe{n), 
sevi{n), gpe[n), ig{n) ' toe/ OF. final / also disappears in plailp) 
^ plea/ pefiii) ‘ petty.’ 

118. Addition. A stop consonant is frequently added finally in 
word or syllable after a continuant, the kind of stop depending upon 
the preceding, and its voiceless or voiced character on the following 
sound. Thus the labial p intrudes after m at the close of the syllable 
in nempnen ‘ name,' empty, dampnen ‘ condemn,' solempne ‘ solemn/ 
iempien ' tempt,' the first two from native, the last from Romance 
sources. Similarly before a vowel or voiced consonant b is intrusive 
after m in pumbe {O'E.puma), cruvibe (OE. crumd), schamhks (OE. 
sceamol-sceamles) ' shambles,' brembel * bramble/ pimbel ‘ thimble,' 
slumhren ^ slumber.' The voiceless dental / is added at the close 
of the syllable after the dental s in Ushien ‘ listen,' gjisinen ' glisten,^ 
behest (O'E., lehces\ anjenst ^against,’ biiwixk, and finally after the 
dental nasal n in the French derived firaunt, /[saunt ‘ pheasant,' 
parchment, pageant The voiced d is added after n, I in voiced 
company, as punder, hindrgd, expounden, jaundice, alder (OE. air a) 
^of all,' and after final n in sound, riband, no doubt because of 
more frequent use before a vow^l or voiced consonant. Less 
commonly a liquid /, r is added after a stop or spirant, as in 
principleiOE.principe), manciple, syllable, chronihle,philosgphre{< 3 F, 
philosophe),provendre (OF. provende). N {y) has also been added 
in nipingale, messenger, passenger. By incoi^rect breaking of the 
breath group an initial / has been added in tg < pat g(n), toper < 
pcetoper, an n in neud < an mt, ngnes {ngnce) < pen gnes. 



Ixxviii 


GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


INFLEXIONS 

Introductory 

iig. As compared with Old English, most changes in the inflexion 
of Middle English words may be summed up under the one head 
of simplification of forms. This simplification, too, far from being 
exceptional in the history of language, has taken place naturally 
and gradually under the influence of phonetic change and analog}’'. 
How far it had gone during the period may be briefly shown. ^ The 
noun, in general, had come to have but a single form for all plural 
cases, and usually but two forms for the singular; the strong 
adjective and adjective pronoun but one form in the singular, 
and one in the plural; the verb also shows a reduction in the 
number of personal endings and in the number of tense and mode 
forms. The former influence, phonetic change, had made dis- 
similar inflexional endings indistinguishable; the latter influence, 
analogy, had caused the substitution of more common foims for 
the less common, until they had wholly displaced the latter. Both 
influences were strong in late Old English, and their strength was 
no doubt increased by the unusual linguistic conditions after the 
Conquest. From this time, for a considerable period, English was 
less frequently the language of government and of a national 
literature, while to a less extent it was influenced by the use of 
Anglo-Norman on English soil and by the gradual introduction, of 
new words from foreign sources. 

Note. — This is not intended to imply that there was any considerable 
influence of the foreign language on English inflexions. Not a single inflex-r 
ional form in the English of common people to-day cannot be accounted' for 
by influences within English itself, and foreign influence should be assumed*^ 
only beside the native, or when the latter fails to explain the phenomenon. 
While inflected tense and mode forms were reduced in number as mentioned 
above, it must be remembered that the compound forms wfth auxiliaries .were 
increasing. 

120. Specifically the most general phonetic change affecting 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


Ixxix 


inflexions from Old to Middle English was the weakening of a, o, u 
in unstressed inflexional endings to e, as in most other unstressed 
syllables (§ 8o), and their consequent union with e already common 
in inflexion. This had followed upon the late OE. weakening of 
unstressed inflexional m to n, as in the dative plural of nouns, 
adjectives and disyllabic pronominal forms. Except in the earliest 
period also, all words show syncopation of final e before words 
beginning with a vowel or h, and frequent loss of final unstressed 
n. These were followed during the period by the total loss of final 
unstressed n in inflexional endings, and in late Middle English by 
final unstressed <?, whether belonging to the inflexion or the stem. 
Owing to these phonetic changes, which obliterated many of the 
differences between the dijBferent genders — for example the only 
difference between weak masculines and feminines in nouns and 
adjectives — the distinctions of grammatical gender in, nouns, 
adjectives, and adjective pronouns was quickly lost. The .most 
general analogical change was the substitution of the more common 
for the less common form. Specifically it may be pointed out that 
in the noun the accusative is probably the case-form of greatest 
frequency and therefore of greatest influence, and in the adjective 
and adjective pronoun, oving to the loss of grammatical gender, 
the neuter prevailed over masculine or feminine. In the personal 
pronouns, the more frequent use of the dative had almost obliterated 
the accusative before the close of Old English. In verbs, the third 
person of the indicative was mpre common than the other present 
forms and prevailed in its root over the others (§ 165). In the 
strong verbs the four stems tended to become three, either the 
preterit singular prevailing over the plural, or the preterit plural 
and past participle, when alike, prevailing oyer the singular preterit. 

Note. — It is significant of tbe inflnence of accnsative and oblique case forms 
that nouns adopted from Norse appear in the stem form found in the accusa- 
tive singular, and nouns and adjectives from Old French almost invariably have 
the form of the OF. oblique case singular rather than the nominative singular. 
Cf. § 



Ixxx GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 

121. That grammatical gender had about disappeared in early 
Middle English is clear from the loss of feminine forms for the 
adjective and the pronoun (except the personal), and the almost 
entire loss of inflexional forms based on feminine and neuter 
originals in Old English, Even when inflexional forms which 
belong to older feminines or neuters are preserved, as an occasional 
genitive singular and a plural in e, and some neuter plurals without 
ending, there is little reason to suppose that they were regarded as 
connected with grammatical gender. They are more probably 
forms which had not yet fully assumed the common inflexion, based 
on that of masculine nouns. As an added evidence of the loss of 
grammatical gender, it may be noted that no foreign-derived noun 
assumed grammatical gender in English, When grammatical 
gender disappeared, natural gender took its place, as in Modem 
English. One of the earliest evidences of this is the assumption of 
natural gender by such words as wif^^ maiden^ which were neuter 
in Old English, and womans lefman ^ leman ^ which were masculine. 

Note.— As usnal, what is said above applies to the Midland dialect. In 
Nth., the loss of inflexional final n had taken place even in OE. (Sievers, ‘ Gr., 
§ 276, anm. 5; § 354, 2, 3^3, $65, 2), as indeed the inflexions had 

been simplified in other respects. The result is that Nth. shows greater 
simplification than Midland even in the earHest period. ^ Sth., on the other 
hand, was somewhat more conservative than Ml. It retains a greater number 
of inflexional forms, especially in the earliest period, as also some distinctions 
of grammatical gender. Even in Sth., however, natural gender begins to 
prevail over grammatical, as shown by feminine pronouns referring to such 
words as wumman^ leaf man ‘ woman, leman.* Further details of dialectal 
usage will be given under inflexions of nouns, pronouns, &c. 

THE NOUN 

122 , Most Middle English nouns are inflected in one of two 
ways, according as they do or do not end in weak & in the 
nominative singular. Both these declensions are based on the 
forms of OE. masculine strong 0 (a)-stems, as shown by the plural 
in es (OE. as). These OE. masculines were assisted in 'their 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION tod 

influence, as in genitive singular, by similar neuter stems, which 
did not differ in inflexion except in the nominative-accusative plural. 
The normal endings of these two declensions are as follows : 



I. 

II. 

Singular, N. A. V. 

— 

e 

G. 

es (s) 

es 

D. 

-w 

e 

Plural, N.A.G.D. 

(s) 

es 


123. Instead of es, is (j/s) also occurs occasionally, especially iiv 
Northern. Forms in parentheses are less common. In addition, 
there are occasional forms, based on the retention of older inflexional 
endings, which are so uncommon as not to be considered normal 
in any sense. Such are plurals without ending, based on the OE. 
neuter plural of long stems, and those in (e), based on the 
OE. weak declension. The first usually belong to declension I, 
the second to declension II, and will be treated under those heads 
(§§ 127, 132). 

Note i, — Early Midland, as represented in the ' Chronicle’ and Orm, differs 
mainly in the somewhat more common retention of older forms, as of dative 
singular in and of plural forms without ending or with (a). In the 
selection from the ‘ Chronicle,’ out of the first twenty-one plurals of different 
words, sixteen have (s), three have no ending, one has e/f, and one This 
does not include two umlaut plurals, which of course belong under § 133. 

Note 2. — In Nth. of the earliest times from which a literature is preserved, 
these two declensions have largely become one, owing to the loss of final the 
change being completed by the middle of the fourteenth centur3\ Nth. also 
commonly shows syncopation of <? in the plural, less commonly in the genitive 
singular. A Nth. genitive without ending, especially in proper names, some- 
times occurs. Sth., on the other hand, preseiwes many plurals in based on 
the OE. of weak nouns, while there are some other peculiarities, as follows. 
The dative singular of declension I more commonly preserves and the 
genitive plural sometimes has forms in or Nouns of declension II, 

besides having m in N. A. D., have e/z (ezu) in the genitive plural. Texts 
differ considerably in these respects, and plurals in are gradually replaced 
by (s) forms. For instance, out of thirteen different plurals in the selection 
from the ‘ Poema Morale,’ ten end in ^s, two in one in In the * Juliana ’ 
selection, out of the first twenty different plurals, eleven have es (s), eight 

f 



Ixxxii 


GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


one no ending. In the selection from ' Robert of Gloucester,’ out of the first 
twenty-four plurals, nineteen have es (e), three at, and one no ending. 

124. The First declension includes nouns ending in a consonant 
or in any vowel except unstressed e. It may be illustrated by dom 
‘ doom,' dat ‘ day,' ire{irew) ‘tree/ igken, as follows : 

Singular 

N.A.V. ddni da},dai ire {irew) igken 

G. domes dajes, dates irees, irewes ighies 

D. dom\e\ ire,irewe igken {igkne) 

Plural 

N.A.G.D. domes dates {dawes) trees, irewes igknes {Igkenes) 

125. To this declension belong most OE. 0 (<2)-stems and long 
Tuo-stems ; long masculine and neuter i- and long masculine «-stems, 
which had in Old English assumed the inflexion of tJ-stems in the 
main; some OE. a-stems which had not assumed, from the accusa- 
tive and other oblique cases, inorganic e in the nominative; and 
some anomalous nouns, as those having mutation, which had 
become regular by the loss of their anomalous inflexion. The few 
OE. d-stems which did not assume inorganic e may have become 
masculine or neuter in Old English, as ME. rerd {reord) ‘ speech, 
beside rerde {reorde). Special mention should be made of OE. 
feminine long f- and long «-stems, which had no inflexional final e in 
the accusative singular and show some variation between declensions 
I and II in Middle English. Their appearance without final ^ may 
be due to the influence of the accusative singular, possibly to change 
of gender and resulting change of inflexion, as in wiji ‘ creature,’ 
Jior ‘floor,’ wer/d^ hand {hgnd). Those with final e may have 
assumed^it in Old English (cf. Sievers, ‘ Gr.,’ § 269, anm. i), as 
nede. Here belong OE. feminine long stems ending in a vowel, as 
j/ ‘ sea,’ ‘ toe,’ ‘ bee,’ slg ‘sloe,’ whether ' originally strong or 
weak. Such words, as all others ending in a long vowel, assume 
s only in gen. sing, and the plural. 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


Ixxxiii 


126. It is impossible in a single table, except a very complex 
one, to represent all variations due to ]\IE. orthography or other 
causes. The most prominent may be briefly mentioned. The 
ending of the genitive singular, as of the plural, is sometimes is {ys). 
Loss of e in the dative singular, common even in early ME., is 
increasingly frequent until that case becomes like the nominative- 
accusative, as in IMcdern English. In certain expressions, however, 
an OE. dative singular in e still survives. Examples are on live 
( < ^/) * 3.1ive,’ id beddsy id wedde ^ for a pledge,’ for fere ^ for fear.' 
Disyllabic stems in ely en^ er often show syncopation of the root e 
when assuming an inflexional ending, as in tgken above ^ Even 
when the spelling shows retention of the stem vowel, syncopation 
is usually to be assumed for the spoken form. Syncopation, often 
loss of inflexional occurs in polysyllables accented on the first 
syllable, as pilgrimes, riveres (pronounced as if spelled pilgrims, 
rivers) beside humours, pildurs i^peler) ^ robbers.’ The orthographic 
variations of words with new diphthongs, as da} {dai), are numerous, 
but will be clear by reference to the phonology. Thus ‘ Genesis 
and Exodus ’ has dai {dei), dages (daiges, dais) ‘ day, day's, dayes,' 
and a plural dazves is also found, based on the development of OE. 
ag to aiv (§ 55). The latter has usually been displaced by a plural 
based on the singular, where OE. ceg became ME. {aiy Occasion- 
ally, however, a new singular daw develops from the plural dawes. 
Stems ending in f, p, s show voicing of these consonants before 
a vocalic ending, as in genitive (sometimes dative) singular and the 
plural. Only in case of f to v, however, is the voicing indicated 
orthographically. 

127. Beyond those noted above, there are but few exceptions to 
the regularity of the common plural form. The most important is 
a plural without ending in the case of certain OE. neuters, or in 
words that have associated themselves with them. Examples are 
folk, ping ' thing,' ger * years,' sze^in ^ swine,' hors ‘ horses/ ship 


^ Cf. Sievers, *Cr.,* § 244. 

f2 



Ixxxiv 


GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


‘ sheep/ dir * deer/ n^/ * neat cattle/ wjpen ‘ weapons/ Most of 
these gradually adopted the usual es {s) ending, though a few 
remain uninflected in the plural to modern times. Occasionally 
words which were not OE. neuters, as fugeh * fowl, fish, are 
uninflected in the plural when used in a collective sense, as in 
Modem English. Variation in the plural of the rcot finals s 
has been noticed in the preceding paragraph. 

128. Foreign derived words were adopted in the stem form or 
that of the accusative singular or oblique case when that differs 
from the stem. Thus ON. words do not appear with the nomina- 
tive inflexional r, but with the accusative singular as od ^ point, 
holi^gU) Hree-trunk/ hark, gar} ^yard,' Orm, ON. oddr, hoir, 
hfrkr, gardr, Orntr* Similarly, where the OF. oblique case 
singular differs from the nominative, the former is regularly adopted, 
as in OF. degre, casfel {chasfel), ddl {del) 'grief' < OF. degrez, 
caslels {chasiels), duelz. The apparent exceptions, so far as OF. 
words are concerned, probably represent differences in OF. usage 
as iempest, poverle, beside tempesie,poverie. Only in armes 'arms' 
was an OF. plural directly borrowed, and this the more easily 
because it agreed exactly with ME. plurals in es* Borrowed words 
generally assume the native inflexion in its entirety. Thus ON., 
OF. words regularly assume native endings, as the gen. and pi. 
es (j), though OF. nouns ending in often remain uninflected as 
cas ' case,' pas ' pace, pass,' and proper names as Eneas, Priamus, 
Pers 'Pierce.’ Occasionally other borrowed words, especially 
Biblical names, remain uninflected in the genitive singular, as 
Ada7?i sonle, David Ignd, following medieval Latin usage. 

Note i. — In early Midland some further traces of inflexion are found, as in the 
nom.-acc. pi. in as in the ' Chronicle ’ occasionally, and a gen. pi. in e, a dat. in e 
(on) rarely ; cf. winire* OE. wintra 'winters.* So Orm has a similar genitive in 
such expressions as allre kinge king 'king of all kings,* deq^e folic ‘ folk of 
devils.* 

Note 2. — As already indicated (§ 123, n. 2), Sth. is much more conservative 
in inflexions than Midland or Nth,, and retains many older forms, as e, in the 
dat. sg., e, ene (en) in gen. pi., en in dat. pi. Many nouns, also, which belong 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


Ixxxv 


to declension I in Ml., have assumed en in the plural in Sth., and hence belong 
to declension II. This is especially tnie of OE. short stem neuters and 
stems. 

129, The Second declension includes all nouns with final un* 
stressed e in the nominative-accusative singular, and may be 
illustrated hy ende (ende) 'end,' helpe 'help,' souk J^ewe ‘habit, 
custom,' as follows : 


Singular, N.A.V. 

ende 

helpe 

souk 

pewe {peuwe) 

G. 

endes 

helpes 

souks 

pewes 

D. 

ende 

helpe 

souk 

pewe 

Plural, N.A.G.D. 

endes 

helpes 

souks 

pewes 


130. Here belong most OE.y^ and short zt;^?-stems ; the majority 
of a (/a, zc;^)-stems ; short and many long feminine f-stems ; short 
2^-stems ; the great body of weak nouns, which had early lost final 
n ; and such others as had assumed inorganic e in the nominative 
singular. OE. feminines (sometimes masculines) ending in g {/i), 
by influence of the oblique cases, assume je, latef we, as sorje 
(sorwe) ^ yurje {ftcrwe) 'furrow,' arwe 'arrow,' while side 
by side a form with final y (Ji) may exist, as /urj {^furJi). OE. 
nouns ending in/* assumed ve of the oblique cases, as Ipe 'per- 
mission,' glove 'glove.' OE. neuter ze;f?-stems had no w in the 
nom.-acc. sg. or pi. and so do not assume it in Middle English, as 
m§le ' meal,' smpe ' ointment,' tgre ' tar.' OE. short feminine wa- 
stems assume we from the oblique cases, as schadwe 'shadow,' 
sinwe 'sinew,' and long stems show double forms sometimes, as 
vqde, 'mead, meadow,' corresponding to forms with or with- 

out w in Old English. ME. schade is possibly from OE. scead 
neut, and not sceadu the wd-stexa. OE. short neuters with e from 
u in nom.-acc. pi. sometimes assumed e in the singular, as 5 ldde 
'blade,' dale, hgde 'prayer,' hgU 'hole,' dpe 'door,' ygke 'yoke,' 
and a few masculines which may have become feminines, as s§le 
(OE. seolh) ' seal.' ME. mpe \mare) ' mare ' is from OM. mere 
(WS. miere), not OE. mearh, masc. OE. masculines ending in eg 



Ixxxvi 


GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


acquired inorganic e, perhaps under the influence of the greater 
number of such words which were feminine. Some original weak 
nouns have a plural in but, for the Midland dialect, are not 
sufficiently numerous to warrant treatment in a separate declension. 
Even when they have en plurals, es plurals are often found side by 
side with them. 

131. A so-called genitive singular in e rarely occurs, but such forms 
may be better explained as essentially compounds. Examples 
are helle pine ' hell punishment,' cjiirche dure ' church door,' rode 
cross 'rood-cross.' All such words have originally, or have assumed, 
inorganic e in the nominative, so that the form is merely the un- 
inflected one which so commonly enters into compounds, whether 
marked by a sign of union or not. In the dative singular, n is 
rarely added, more especially in rimes with forms regularly ending 
in «. As these occur mainly in south-east Midland texts of the 
earliest time, they may be due to the influence of the Sth. dialect, 
in which this peculiarity is more common (see Note 2 below), or 
they may be connected with the influence of the plural en forms. 

132. The most important peculiarity of the plural is the retention 
of en {n) forms from the OE. weak declension, and the extension 
of this occasionally to nouns not originally weak. The whole 
number of such nouns is relatively small, and they decrease 
throughout the ME, period, until the only relics left in MnE. are 
oxen^ rarely eyen in poetry, and hreihrcn^ children^ ktne, to which 
this ending has been extended. Examples in ' Gen. and Ex.’ are 
wunnen ‘ cxisXomsJ feren 'companions’; in 'Bestiary,' willen 'wishes,' 
egen ' eyes.' ' Gen. and Ex.' also shows the extension of this en to 
OE. strong nouns, as c^/en ' coals,' /reen (freri) beside trees ' trees,' 
mpen ' meats/ st^den ' places,' sunen beside sums ' sons.' Owing 
to its early date and its south-east Midland dialect, the number of 
such forms in this poem is greater than in others, especially in 
lime, where the usage can hardly be relied on as showing the forms 
of ordinary speech. More rarely still, plurals in- e are found, as in 
'Gen. and Ex,' elm ' ells,' senwe *sinews,'yr?r^ 'companions,' 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


Ixxxvii 


Note i. — In early Midland a gen. sg. in £ is occasional, as in Orm's sdwle 
* f rdf re ‘comfort’s,’ asse ‘ass’s,’ wkche * witch’s.’ Probably in all these 

cases the intrusion of s was resisted by the close connexion with the following 
noun. Rarely also, gen. plurals in e are also found, as Onn's sdwle ‘ souls’,’ 
shaffte ‘ creatures’ ’ ; compare the retention of ejt in true compounds, as Sunenn^ 
' Sunday,’ tikhiennsang ‘ early morning song.’ Plurals in en are also 
somewhat more common in this period, as halechen ‘saints ’ in the ‘ Chronicle,” 
wazvenn * walls,’ hallgheun ‘ saints,* e^hne {ekne, ehhne) ‘ eyes ’ in ‘ Ormulum.’ 
Orm also has occasional e plurals, as hallfe ‘ halves,’ shajfte ‘ creatures.’ 

Note 3. — Nth. is even more radical than Midland in giving up the old weak 
plurals in en^ but a few still appear in ‘ Cursor Mundi,’ as oxeyt^ eien ‘eyes,’ ^ren 
beside ires ‘ears.* Occasionally no inflexion occurs, as mheven bits, heifen 
king, which are essentially compounds. In other respects Nth. does not differ 
markedly from Ml. except as noted in § 123, n. 2. Sth. retains many more 
relics of the OE. declension, as a gen. sg. in e, and a dat. in en in case of many 
OE. weak nouns. Indeed en sometimes intrudes itself into the singular nomina- 
tive-accusative forms. In the plural, forms in en, e, rarely a, are especially 
common in the earliest period, as also genitives in me (^w), e, and datives in 
eti. All such forms gradually grow less frequent, and are almost entirely re- 
placed in late Sth. by regular forms. 


ANOMALOUS NOUNS 


133. A few nouns belonging to minor declensions in Old English 
show some peculiarities of inflexion. They include nouns with 
mutation as the distinctive feature, nouns of relationship, and those 
with original stems in nd, os (es)* Those of the first subclass are 
declined as follows : 


Singular, N. A. foi 

G. /dies 
D, fdi{e) 

Plural, N- A. D. fet 

G. files (file) 


man 
mannes 
man, manne 
men 

mennes [nianne) 


134, Few examples of these mutation nouns are found in Middle 
English, since most of them had already lost all traces of mutation 
and had ranged themselves with the regular classes. It is difficult 
therefore to be certain of all forms, but there is a clear corre- 
spondence in the singular with the nouns of declension 1 . In the 



Ixxxviii 


GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


plural, the distinguishing feature is a nominative-accusative-dative 
with mutation but no ending. For the genitive plural, Orm has 
menness once, beside manne. An old genitive plural foie occurs 
after a numeral, as iwel foie ‘twelve feet' (dialectally to-day ‘twelve 
foot'), ‘Havelok,' 1054. Other nouns having mutation plurals are 
gos ‘ goose,' vius ‘ mouse,' lus ‘ louse,' ku [cm)) the plural of which, 
kyn ‘ kine,' has assumed n by analogy of en forms. A few nouns 
have uninflected plurals without mutation, as monejf [O'E, monei^) 
in twelve mo 7 iihe ‘ twelvemonth,' mhf in such expressions as seven 
niht ‘seven nights, sennight.' ME. hrech, ‘breech, breeches,' 
preserves the mutation plural of OE. hrbc^ and becomes singular. 

Note i. — Early Midland has a few other mutation nouns, as Orm’s gat 
* goat,' g^e * goats,' an old feminine. 

Note 2. — Nth. does not differ from Midland, except in greater regularity of 
forms. Thus ku (kbu) *cow,' has the regular mutation plural kt (kf) without 
the n of MI, and Sth. usage. Sth. has a greater variety of forms, as gen. pi. 
monne, monnene (en), dat. inomien. So also fbten as gen. pi., and brechen 
(brec/tcs) a pi, of brech ^ trousers.' 


135. The nouns of relationship are declined as follows : 
Singular, N. A. V. fader ‘ father ' broker ‘ brother ' 
G. fader, fadj'es hrdper, hrbpres 

D. fader hrdper 


Plural, N. A. G. D. fadres hrepren, hrepere 

The genitive singular without ending persists through the ME. 
period, though the form in es also occurs from the earliest time. 
The older mutated dative has entirely disappeared. Like these 
nouns are declined moder, dohier [dopier, doubter) ‘ daughter,' sister, 
the last from Norse sysier and the regular Midland form. 


Note r. — Early Midland, as Orm, has uninflected forms more commonly, 
with the mutated form of bri]>re in plural nom., acc., and gen, Orm also uses 
susstress * sisters,' from the OE. rather than the Norse form of the word. 

Note 2. — Nth. prefers the uninflected form of the gen. sg., and the plural in 
es (s) except for brdfer which has pi. briber for all cases. The mutated 
dehteres occurs sometimes, beside the more common dohieres ‘ daughters.' Sth. 
has both inflected and uninflepted gen. sg., but prefers en plurals in the earlier 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


Ixxxix 


period, as hroferen {breferen)^ dohU'eyt^ susiren. The native English suster 
from OE. sweoster {swusfer), rather than the Norse form of the word, is common 
in Sth. as in Chaucer. 

136. Here may be mentioned the remnants of the OE. os^ es 
stems, child, lamb, the only words that show peculiar forms. The 
natural developments of the OE. plurals, childru, lamhru, were 
childre, lamhre, and these are often found in Midland, Later they 
both assumed the en ending, first in Sth., later in Midland, though 
at the same time lamb acquired a regular plural lambes^ In the 
North childre (childer) remained the plural form, and lambre gave 
place entirely to lambes (lambis). In Sth. another word of this class, 
calf, followed child in adding en[il) to the older plural in re, as 
calveren ^ calves.’ 

137* Of stems in nd, only frmd, fend ‘ friend, fiend ’ preserve 
peculiarities, and these only in the earlier part of the period. In 
that period uninflected plural forms are found, as frend, fend 
‘friends, fiends.' These were soon displaced by the regular 
frmdes,fendes. For the quantity of frend, see § 79, n. 

THE ADJECTIVE 

138. The adjective has lost all trace of its OE. inflexion except 
for an ending e, which is added to those not originally ending in 
a vowel, to form the plural, the weak form after a demonstrative 
or possessive pronoun, or rarely a dative case. So far as this trace 
of the older inflexion is found, adjectives in Middle English are 
declined in one of two ways, as they do or do not end in un- 
stressed <?, The weak form of the adjective is used after a pos- 
sessive or demonstrative pronoun, including the. definite article, and 
in the vocative. In either case, if the adjective follows the noun 
without the repetition of the demonstrative (definite article), it 
remains uninflected. 

I. Strong 

Singular wis mam Utel fre 

Plural wise, mani {manije, manie) UUl{Me) fre 



xc 


GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


Weak, Sg. and FL 

wise mam {niame) Hid fre 

II. Strong and Weak 
Singular grene 
Plural grene 

139, To declension I belong 0 (a)-stems, including polysyllables 
and short yo-stems, except a few which have assumed inorganic e \ 
long z&£>-stems with vowel preceding w ; and long ^/-sterns which 
had gone over to the ^?-stems in OE. times. Monosyllables ending 
in a vowel, and usually polysyllables, are uninflected Th€ 
participle is also regularly uninflected, as often in Old English, 
Relics of older inflexion appear in aller {aldre\ OM. alra (WS. 
ealrc^ ‘of all/ both alone and in compounds as alderbesi {alperbest)\ 
and in occasional dative phrases, as of ngne gode^ of harde grace. 
In the latter part of the period the adjective tends to lose all trace 
of inflexion, as shown by poetry, especially when far removed from 
the noun. This is but preliminary to the total loss of final e in 
adjectives as in other words. Adjectives belonging to declension II 
are virtually inflexionless. Here belong OE. long yb-stems ; short 
ze?^?-stems ; i and ^/-sterns, except such as had taken the inflexion of 
OE*. ^-sterns. Short wo-siemsj ending in u with w in oblique case 
forms, usually end in zve in Middle English, as calwe ^ cbMow/ falwe 
‘fallow,' salwe ‘ sallow/ ‘yellow/ but sometimes forms ending 
in e alone are also found, as jdre beside jarwe ‘ ready ' (Shake- 
speare'sj^fl'r^), ndre beside narwe ‘narrow/ OE. adjectives ending 
in palatal h (g) lose the final consonant as a rule, those with 
guttural b (g) develop forms in je{we) from the oblique cases, as 
noh-mme ‘ enough,' woh {wou^h)-wowe ‘ bad,’ sorful-soruful ‘ sor- 
rowful/ walwe (OM. walg^ WS. wealg) ‘sickly,' ark{j)-arwe 
‘cowardly.' OE. adjectives ending in /regularly change /to v 
before <?. 

140. Most borrowed words fall into the same cla-sses as the 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


xci 


corresponding native adjectives and are similarly inflected. Thus 
OF. adjectives not ending in a vowel assume the plural and 
weak e, as do native words, but OF. polysyllables which have 
acquired the Teutonic accent on the first syllable remain uninflected. 
The OF. seint often appears as seinie, but not exclusively before 
feminines. It is probable that both forms were adopted without 
regard to the OF. distinction of gender, though seinie would more 
naturally occur with certain feminines, as Seinie Marie (ri6, 15); 
but cf. Seint Marie (118, 2), Seinie Powel (200, 19). A few OF. 
adjectives with OF. plurals are found, as in places deliidbles 
' delectable places,' goodes iemporeiles ' temporal goods,' but these 
are mainly in prose translated pieces, rarely poetry and that of the 
more learned poets, so that they can hardly have been living forms 
among the people. 

Note i. — Early Midland shows a somewhat fuller retention of older forms, 
though in the ^ Chronicle’ from the year 1133 there is no variation from what is 
given above. 

Note. 2, — In Nth. the two declensions tend to become one by the loss of 
final unstressed as in nouns. The plural e of declension I has generally 
disappeared, and many adjectives ending in unstressed (f have lost this ending, and 
have fallen in with those without e. Even the ending e of weak forms is not 
regularly preserved after a demonstrative. In early Sth. some further traces of 
OE. inflexions are still found, as a genitive singular in es^ especially when the 
adjective stands without a substantive, but also in some other cases as summes 
weies ‘ some ways ’ in the ‘Juliana* selection. So bpj>en ^ both,' with en^ but such 
forms are rare. The distinction between strong and weak forms of adjectives 
not ending in unstressed e is generally preserved, as in declension I above, 

COMPARISON 

141. The adjective is compared by the addition of the endings re 
(later er) for comparative, esi for superlative, from the OF. endings 
ra, osi (esi) by regular vowel changes. At the same time com- 
parison by use of the adverbs mgre, mfsi begins to be used, especi^- 
ally wuth polysyllables. Long root syllables show shortening in 
comparative and superlative, in accordance with § ^6, as gret- 
gretier, sweie-sweiier, but analogy of the positive often restores the 



xcii 


GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


long vowel. Adjectives from Old French are compared like 
native w'^ords, with a tendency to use the adverbial comparison 
with polysyllables. As to inflexion, comparatives could not 
assume e after re^ and did not usually after the later er ; super- 
latives like hesi^ mgst, first were regularly inflected, as w'ell as those 
with secondary stress upon the superlative ending, for example 
semHest, but most superlatives remain uninflected. 

142. As in Old English, a few adjectives are irregular in com- 
parison. Thus gldj tgngy strgng still retain mutated comparatives, 
as elder-eldest, lenger-lengest ' longer-longest,' sirenger-sirengest 
' strong-strongest.' Some adjectives have forms of comparison 
with different roots from the positive, as god 'good,' hetlre (heire)— 
best] ivil {pH), werse (worse, zmrseywersi {worst, wursi) ; the 
corresponding Norse forms are also found, as ille-werre, the 
former of which has remained to Modern English ; michel (niikel, 
vittchel, much), mgre {mgj-mgst {mfsl ) ; Uiel (Hie), lesse {lasse)-Ipt 
' least.' Forms of comparison based on adverbs, sometimes pre- 
positions, are /er ' i2sl-ferre {ferrer) ' farther,' dialectal farer— 
ferrest ' farthest /^/v, per, perest; niter, utter est', upper, 
uppesL In nerre ' nearer,' ferrest ' furthest,' new forms of com- 
parison have been based on older comparatives. The OE. super- 
lative suffix mcesi appears as mpt, mast and mget, the latter finally 
prevailing. 


NUMERALS 

143. Most numerals are adjectives in function, though often 
uninflected. The older use as nouns with a following genitive 
disappeared entirely, except in sporadic cases, as twel f die ' twelve 
feet' ('Havelok,' 1054), where the expression is a mere survival 
without syntactical significance for Middle English. The cardinal 
numerals are as follows, though no attempt is made to give every 
variant even of Midland : gn ‘ one ' ; two {tweyne, tweye) ' two, 
twain ' ; fire {ihre ) ' three ' ; foure {/owre) ' four ’ ; /tf{/yve) ' five ' \ 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


xciii 


sex {sexe^ sixe) ‘ six ' ; sevefi {sevens, save) ^ seven ’ ; epe {eghie, 
eights) ‘ eight ' ; mpn {nine) ‘ nine ’ ; ten] enleven {elevens, eleve) 
‘ eleven ' ; twelf {twelve) \ J?reitene {pritiene) ^ thirteen ^ ; fouriene ; 
fftene {Jyftlne)\ sex tine {six tine)] seventme] epene {eghtene, 
eightene) ] ni^entine {nmetene) ; iwenfi {twenty) ; pritti ; fourU ] 
hundred ] pousen {pmsende) ' thousand/ The ON. form hundrep is 
found beside the English hundred, and from OF. the new numeral 
miliun {millioun) 'million' was adopted. Counting by the score 
(ON. skor ME. shgre) is of Norse origin, as the word itself implies 
by its form. 

144. The numeral gn ' one ' sometimes has the old genitive gnes 
in early texts, and a plural of the same form in the expressiony^r 
J?e ngnes ' for the nonce.' Plurals of the adjective form, gne, ngm, 
algne, ng gnes, also occur rarely. Such forms as five, sixe, 
twelve usually occur when standing alone or after a substantive, 
as well as in the plural. Two or three Old French numerals are 
rarely found, as cinq, sis ' five, six ' in Chaucer. In early Midland 
the weakened forms of the first numeral, an (a), are common as an 
indefinite article, and these are found throughout the period as in 
Modern English. Owing to the tendency to drop inflexional n 
in unstressed syllables such forms as seve 'seven,' eleve 'eleven' 
result. 

Note i. — Early Midland has other inflexional forms of the first and second 
numerals, as Orm’s aness ' one’s,* (Mnne, acc. masc. 

Note 2. — Nth. forms naturally differ in phonology, as^;^ id), twa, alit {aghi) 
eight, ^ but these differences will he easily understood. Nth. has lost all forms 
of inflexion for the mimerals, except as in other adjectives; see § 138. Nth. 
also has some Norse forms which are less common in Midland, as invtn,}nn, 
hundre} ‘two, three, hundred.’ Sth., especially. early Sth,, preserves the gen. 
masc. and fern, gnes, anre (drtf),the latter also as dat. fern. ; the acc. masc. and 
fern, as anne, ane, Sth. also has a gen. and dat. pi. of OE. iwegen, ' two,’ as 
iweire, iwam^ These, however, soon give place to regular forms. 

145, The ordinal numerals are firsts {forme, firms), oper and 
later secounde, pridde {pirdi), ferpe {fourpi), fiffe, sexie {sixte), 
)gvepe {sevende, sevenpe), epepe {epende, eightepe), nippe {niyende, 



xciv 


GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


nmj>e), ie^pe {tigpe, imde, ienpe), endlefie (ellefie, ellmend, elevenpe), 
iwelfte, pretePe {^pretende, preienpe), &c. Ordinals with ende, as 
sevende, are sometimes Mercian in origin, sometimes perhaps Norse. 
Old English oper is finally displaced by secmnde from Old French, 
though remaining pronominal as always. The ordinals regularly 
end in e, owing to their position as weak adjectives after ‘ the.’ 

Note.— In Nth. the forms with ende {end, and, ind) prevail, whiie in Sth. 
these are rare except in Kentish. 

146. Multiplicatives are formed with the suffix OMerc. 
fd,ld (WS. feald\ as gnffd ' onefold/ The multiplicative idea, 
how’’ever, is expressed in various other ways, as by words meaning 
‘ times ' and by various adverbs. Distributives are gn and gn ' one 
and (by) one,' iwo and iwo, &c. Adverbs also, as beiwin, frequently 
express a distributive idea. 


THE PRONOUNS 

147. As to function, pronouns are either substantive, adjective, 
or both, and this distinction is important in understanding their 
inflexions in Middle English. Those that are wholly or mainly 
adjective in function, as possessives, demonstratives, and most 
indefinites, followed adjectives in their simplification to two forms, 
one for the singular and one for the plural. Those pronouns that 
are wholly or mainly substantive in function, as the personal, inter- 
rogative, and inflected relative, preserve, as their peculiar feature, 
an accusative-dative, generally based on an original dative and 
differing in form from the nominative. But the genitives of the 
personal pronouns have largely lost any substantive function, as 
of a substantive in oblique case, and their adjective functions are 
supplied by the possessives based upon them, together with new* 
third personal possessives from the genitives of the so-called pro- 
noun of the third person. The latter, therefore, though given in 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


xcv 

the inflexion, are enclosed in parentheses to indicate their more 
restricted use. 

148. The Personal Pronouns proper are inflected as follows : — 

First Second 

Sing. Plur. Sing. Plur, 

N. 2 c {Ik, Ich) I we pu {pou, ihou) jf [ye) 

G. {myn) [ure, dure) {pin) {yure, ^dure^ youre) 

D- A. 7 ne us {pus) pe {thee) pm {pdu,ydu) 

149. It is scarcely necessary to give all orthographic variations 
of these and the other personal pronouns. Ic {Ik\ /, though 
without capitalization in the manuscripts, are the normal Midland 
forms, as also yme, }uw {ydure,ydu) with initial y {y) by analogy 
of je {ye), and a vowel due to shifting of accent from the first 
element of the diphthong in OE. lower, eow, owing to constant 
use in unstressed position in the sentence. The form pu, owing to 
similar unstressed position and to assimilation, often becomes iu {u, 
dU) when immediately following a verb ending in /, as shaU iu {u, 
du) for ‘shalt thou.' For ie from pe, see §§ 100, 114. Dual forms 
are rarely found in the earliest texts, as wit-unc, gunker-gunc ‘ we 
two,' * you two,^ in * Genesis and Exodus ' ; but these so soon dis- 
appear as to be quite irregular, and not deserving of a place in 
inflexion. 

Note i. — Early Midland does not differ materially. For ^ Hre , luw , the 
earliest * Chronicle* has iure, suggesting the older Northumbrian form iurre 
(Sievers, ' Gr./ § 332, anm. 4). Orm also has ^ure, ^uuo, showing the early 
addition of initial 

Note 2.— Nth. does not differ from Midland. In Sth* Iclt is the normal 
form for the first person. This is sometimes united with a following wulh 
{wblle) 'will,* as ichulle {icholle) *I will,* though each word is preserved 
separate in this book. Sth. also preserves genitive and accusative forms of the 
second personal pronoun without initial as lower (pwer) * your,’ eow (bw, du) 
*you.' Besides, dual forms, which are almost unknown in Midland, are 
occasionally found, 



xcvi GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


150. The so-called third personal pronoun has the following 
forms : — 




Singular 


Masc. 


Neut. 

Fern. 

N. he 


hit, it 

sch% she {sho), heo {he, ho) 

G. 

{Ms) 


{hire, hir, here, her) 

D. 

Mm 


hire {pir), here {her) 

A. him \hi 7 i\ 


hit, it 

Plural 

hire {hir) 


N. hi [hy^ }ie\ pei {pey, pai, pay) 

G. {here, hire, petre,peir, pair) 

D.A. hem, pern {peim,paim) 


151- The genitives of the third personal pronoun, under the 
influence of possessives formed from the same case of the first and 
second personal pronouns, became possessives also, as shown by 
their inflexion in Middle English. The old masculine accusative 
singular, hine '{hin), occurs rarely in early texts, as ' Genesis and 
Exodus'; but with this exception the masculine and neuter forms 
are quite regular. Those of the feminine singular nominative, on 
the other hand, are numerous, as they are based on OE. heo or on 
the OE. demonstrative seo, from which the prevailing form develops. 
The former appear as ge {ghe) in ‘Gen. and Ex.,'^? in ‘Best.,' 
heo {he) in ‘ Flor. and Blanch.,' (^?) hi ^ Adam and Eve.' Forms 
based on the latter appear first in the ‘ Chronicle ' as sc&, sge 
{=zsye), sche in ‘ Gen. and Ex.,' sche {she, scheo, sho) in other Mid- 
land texts until, about 1300, they prevail over the others. The 
earliest plurals are based on the OE. plurals hl-here-hem. The 
prototype of the Modern English ih^, based on the Norse demon- 
strative which is first found in Orm, occurs once as pei in ‘ Gen. 
and Ex.' In general, however, it is not until the beginning of 
the fourteenth century that the nominative pei {pai, they) becomes 
common^ and not until late ME. that all forms with initial ih {p) 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


xcvii 


prevail. Chaucer, as representative of London English, has ihei 
{they), but here-hem. In some early texts, as ‘ Gen. and Ex. " hit (it) 
is plural as well as singular, and another plural his {is, es), perhaps 
based on the singular masculine or from Sth., is also found. 

152. As in Old English, the personal pronouns are used re- 
fiexively, both alone and in combination with self. But such forms 
as miself, pyself, based on weak forms of the dative-accusative, or 
possibly combinations of the possessives and self used substantively, 
occur as early as the fourteenth century, and in Sth. a century earlier. 

Note i. — In early Midland the early use of scit 'she,* in the ' Chronicle,’ and 
' they-their-them,* in Orm are the most important 

variations. 

Note 2. — Nth. regularly has the fern, scho {sc5), acc. /^zV, as also the plural 
forms with ]>, fai {}ei), fair {feir\ faim {faime, fain, fame), but with an 
occasional ham ' them.’ Sth. has preserved the masc, acc. hine beside the dat. 
him, and the fern, heo {hS, he, ht, hue). Variants for masc. he are also ha (a). 
The plural forms are based on those of OE., as nom, acc. hi {hii, hue, heo), 
here (hire, heore, hueore, hor), heom (ham, huem, hem, horn). Sth. also has 
a plural hise (is) * them,’ beside hi, 8cc. As reflexives, Nth. has occasional 
forms with the genitive instead of the dative-accusative, as yourself, fairself, 
which seem to be unknown in Sth. 

153. The Possessive Pronouns are viin {ml, my), fin {ft, thf), 
his, hire {hir), ure {ur, our), f Tire {fur, ymre, your), here {her, hire, 
hir) with their {feir) in late ME. These are declined like adjec- 
tives, with plurals in f when the singular does not end in that vowel. 
The weakened forms mi, fi, occur only before words with initial 
consonants. The predicate and absolute forms are min,fm, his, 
here, ure, fure, here, with plurals in e. Late forms in s are Tires, 
^ures, heres, but these do not appear in the earlier part of the 
period. Some texts also show forms with n, as mren, furen, heren 
occasionally. The dual possessives uncer, incer appear only in 
the earliest period. 

Note i. — Early Midland (Orm) shows fe^^rs, the earliest absolute form in.?,* 
though perhaps due to Nth. influence. 

Note 2 . — Nth. works frequently show absolute forms in s, as hers, urs, 
yours, fairs, while they are unknown in Sth. 

g 



xcviii 


GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


154. The Demonstrative Pronouns, like adjectives with which 
they agree in use, retain at most only singular and plural forms 
without distinction of gender. They are three in number, two 
from OE. masculine and neuter se (late OE. pf) and JxBi ‘ the,’ 
‘ that,’ and one from the OE. neuter J>is ‘ this.’ The first, {pt) 
{ihtj, is invariable and is used as a definite article ; the others are 
declined as follows : — 

Sing, pat {pet, that) pis {pys, this, ihys) 

Plur. Ps (pa, thg) pise (pis, iM{e)), pese {pes, ihes{e)), pgs. 

155. A relic of the OE. dative plural remains in the expres- 
sion for pe ngnes = for then gnes ‘ for the nonce,’ with final n from 
m transferred to the beginning of the next word. In a similar 
way final t of pat is sometimes transferred to a word beginning 
with a vowel, as pe tg,pi toper (earlier^?/ g, pet oper^ the one, the 
other’ ; ‘tother ’ is still dialectal English. For te, tat, tg from pe, 
pat, /Rafter words ending in d, t, sometimes s, see §§ 100, 114. In 
the later period only atte = at pe ‘at the ’ remains. A relic of the 
OE. instrumental py appears in forpi, and as pe, in pe mgre and 
similar expressions. Occasionally pn, jgnd {yon, ygnd) < OM. 

' gon (WS. geon) are also found as demonstratives. 

Note i.— E arly Midland shows }S. for pg, in accordance with § 43, n. i. 
The ‘ Chr.’ once has J>as ‘these,’ the OE. form, under tire year 1132. 

Note 2.— Nth. has }aas (J>ds) beside the more common )a (pad) as plural 
of pat. as well as Norse ptr (peir, fed), and pits (pes) for the plural of pis. 
Sth., especially early Sth., shows a much fuller retention of OE. forms. Masc. 
are R-Pl, G. Pes (pe), Ts.pen (pe), A. P'ene (PT ) ; Nent. N. K.pet (Pe), G.pes 
(Pti, D. pen (ptj ; Fern. N. }eo (Pe), G. D. pgr (P?). Plural N. A. pso ips), 
G. Peo, pe (per), D. Peo, pe (pen). Also Masc. N. pes, G. pisses, D. pisse, A. 
pissu ; Neut. N. A.pis, G. D. as masc. ; Fern. N. A. peos, G. D. pisse. Plural 
N. A. G.Jteos, D.^eoSjJtissen^ 

156. The pronoun of identity, ilc {ilk, ilche, uhe,yche), is declined 
like an adjective. The demonstrative and ilk {ilke) often unite 
by elision oie, as }>U^e {pilehe). The intensive self 2hso appears as 
selve, selven. 

Note i. — N th. has ilk, ilke invariably; Sth. ilchiilckei later uh 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


XCIX 


157. The Relative Pronoun of Middle English, which is used 
universally and in all periods, is fiat ' that/ Beside it OE. fie is 
found for a time, but soon disappears altogether. These are both 
indeclinable. In the fourteenth century others appear, as which^ 
pi. whiche (which), and the genitive whos (whose) dative whom come 
to be used; also compound relatives as fiat hi^ fiat Ms, &c., fie 
which, which fiat, fie which fiat 

Note i. — In early Midland is common beside fiat. 

Note 2. — Nth. has fiat alone in the earliest texts. Sth. uses fie,fiet, later 
fiat, and retains fie much longer than in Midland. In the early fourteenth ^ 
century Sth. also 'h.ti.%wkan (wan, wa 7 tne, wane) ‘whom, what,’ evidently from 
OE. hwam by weakening of m. 

158. The Interrogative-Indefinite Pronouns are who (ho), while 
(Jiwilc, whicJi), whefiar (hwefier, whether) ‘ who, which, whether.^ 
The first is declined as follows, without distinction of number 

Masc.-Fem. Neut. 

N. hwo (wo, who, ho) hwat {^waf, what) 

G. hwos (wos, whos, whose) 

D. hwdni (worn, whom) 

A. hwom (worn, whom) hwat (wat, what) 

159. The others are declined like adjectives, though whether is 
usually uninflected. Compound forms are also found, as hwo sg, 
hwose ^ whoso,' <fec. Some Midland texts, as ‘ Genesis and Exodus,^ 
have the spelling with qu for hw (wh) which is especially charac- 
teristic of Nth. Thus quo, quom (quam), quai, quefier, &c. 

Note i. — Early Midland shows the earliest use of wh for OE. hw, as regu- 
larly in Orm, a spelling which is not established until the last half of the 
fourteenth century. 

Note 2. — In Nth. the spelling with qu for hw prevails with few exceptions. 
Nth. uses smn as well as swa in compound forms, as quasum, quaisum, Sth. 
variants are hwoa beside hwo, and occasional forms with a, as hwas, hwam 
(hwan), hwose, ‘whoso.’ <Sth. also has hwuch, hwufier, iox hwich, hwefier, 
by influence of the preceding consonant on the vowel. 

160. Other ' indefinites are al ^all'’; anl (any,gny, eny) ^any'; 
afit (auyt, ought) ‘ aught ' ; nafit taught, nought) ‘ naught ' ; hgthe 



c 


GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


‘both'; elch {ech, £che) ‘each%‘ ai}er {eiper, ouper) ‘either’; 
naiper (netper, nouper) ‘neither’; evenlc {everkh, evert) ‘every’; 
evc'nwh^ inhere) ‘ everywhere ’ ; inam ‘ many ’ ; nicin^ (men, me) 
‘ man, one, they ' ; ‘ one ’ ; npn ‘ none ' ; oper ‘ other ’ ; sum 

(som) ‘ some ’ ; swilc (swich, sucK) * such ’ ; wiht (poighi) ‘ wight.’ 
Compound forms are also common, as everilcgn (everichgii) 
‘ everyone,' mam an(a) ‘ many a,' sumdjl ‘ somedeal,’ sumkzn ‘ some- 
hind,’ sumwai ‘ somewhat,’ &c. 

161. The indefinites are in general declined as adjectives, but 
a few special forms must be mentioned. An old genitive plural of 
al, aller {alder, alper) is found occasionally, and in one or two 
compounds as a stereotyped form, as ydure aller cost ‘ cost of you 
all,’ and alderhest ‘ best of all,' alder first ‘ first of all ’ ; hgihe ‘ both 
sometimes has a plural hgihen in imitation of nouns in a 
genitive of oper, opres ‘ other’s ' also occurs. 

Note. — Nth. has allirs, ha]>ir {bdpirs) * of all, of both,’ instead of alter, 
bgfe (pgfen) above ; also same * same,’ slUe {sUc, slf) * such,’ both Norse forms 
peculiar to Nth. texts or those influenced by Nth. Nth. also retains qnon * few,’ 
from OE, Sth. retains many inflexional forms from OE. times, such as 

have been mentioned already under § 140, n, 2. In addition, Sth. has some 
plurals formed under the influence of the en nouns, as bgpen ‘ both,’ operen 
' others.’ Other forms of special peculiarity are Sth. eni, ei ‘ any ’ ; mnne, acc. 
sg. of ngzt ‘ none ’ ; swnmes, pi. of sum ‘ some. 

THE VERB 

162. With the exception of the few anomalous forms, verbs 
belong to two classes as in Old English, the weak distinguished by 
a preterit tense with dental suffix, the strong by one with change of 
root voweH. As in Old English, also, the verb has both inflected 
and compound forms, the latter made up by the use of verbs 
originally independent but weakened to the force of auxiliaries, as 

^ The distinction between gradation and original reduplication verbs need 
not be here regarded, since the distinguishing feature remaining to Middle 
English is a change of root vowel, though sometimes owing to contraction of 
original reduplication. 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


d 


in Modern English. The inflected forms, all belonging to the 
active voice, are two tenses, a present and preterit; two modes, 
an indicative and subjunctive, or subjunctive-optative since it has 
the uses of both ; an infinitive, and two participles, a present and 
a past. The compound forms are four indicative tenses, a future 
and three perfects, present, past and future ; a present and past 
optative, or potential, with auxiliaries may, can^ &c. ; a present 
perfect infinitive and participle ; and a passive with all the modes 
and tenses of the active, both inflected and compound. 

163. The normal inflexional endings of the verb may be seen in 
the following scheme : 


Inflexional Endings of the Verb 
Weak Strong ( Weak Strong 
Present Indicative Preterit 


Sing. I. 

2. 

3 * 

Ph 1,2,3. 

e 

est 

ep (etk) 
e(n) ^ 


ede^ de {ie) 
edest, dest {test) 
ede, de (/<?) 

ede(n), {ed), de{n), fe{n) 

e {-) 

e{n) 



Subjunctive 


Sing. I, 2, 3. 

PI. I, 2, 3. 

e 

e(n) 


ede, de {ie) 
ede{n)^ de{n), Ie{n) 

e 

e{n) 



Imperative 


Sing. 2. e 

PL 2. (<?///), 

e ep { iK ), e, - 




Infinitive 


e{n) I 

Participzxs 

ende {ande), tnge | ed {d, /) {€)n 

^ Loss of final n in all en forms grows increasingly common through the 
period. For dialectal peculiarities, see § 166, notes. 

2 Loss of final e is most common in this inflexional form. 



cii 


GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


364. So far as inflexional endings are concerned, a single class 
of weak verbs resulted from the three weak classes of Old English. 
In the present tense the endings of the weak and strong verbs are 
the same, but for slight differences in the imperative. Sjmcope 
and apocope of e are sometimes found, more commonly in the 
latter part of the period. Loss of final n also grows more common 
through the period, thus reducing the number of forms, while final 
e is regularly silent in late Middle English. The second and third 
person singular of the present indicative, occasionally the plural 
imperative, sometimes have es (s), the characteristic Nth. forms. 
Assimilation and simplification in the consonants of the third 
singular are occasional, as ftni beside findeji^ sit beside sittep. 
Verbs ending in a vowel naturally show contraction with the 
vowel of the ending, as see^ sest, sep ^ see, seest, seeth.^ The 
imperative plural ending is reduced to <?, or lost altogether w^hen 
immediately followed by its pronoun. The prefix OE. ge, in 
the past participle is rarely found. 

165. Analogy played an important part in the development of 
inflexional endings. Thus OE. verbal stems in r which retained i 
from the Teutonic jan ending, whether weak or strong, and verbs 
of the second weak class in lan {zgean) regularly lost i (z) in all 
forms in which it occurred. Their infinitives came to end in m as 
in the case of other OE. verbs in an, and e in the ist sg. pres., en 
in the plural and ep in the imp. pi. Examples are hpren (OE. 

praise ' for the OE. first weak class, sweren (OE. swerian) 
‘ swear ' the only strong verb, and imnen (OE. wuman) ^ dwell ' 
for the second weak class. But OE. verbal stems in rgan {rgian) 
retain 2 from palatal ^ (z^), as hinm 'bury.' Similarly OE. verbal 
stems in eg, hh, whether weak or strong, lost those combinations in 
the present and assumed those of the third sg,, as seien for seggen 
(OE. seegan) ' say/ Iijen, Hen (OE. liegan) ' lie, recline,' haven (OE. 
kabban) ‘have,' hpen (OE. hebban) 'heave, raise.' OE. Ubban 
‘Kve,' however, gave way before OE. Ufian of the second weak 
class in preterit and past participle, the present of both verbs falling 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


ciii 


together by reason of both the above changes. For grammatical 
change in strong verbs see § 172. 

166. The verb haven ‘have/ the only relic of the third weak 
cofljugation which has not become regularized, has the following 
peculiarities: present have, hast {has), hap {hath); pi. haven {have); 
preteyit, hafde {haved, hadde, had). Mdhen ‘ make ' shows a similar 
loss of medial /^, and clypen ‘clothe' of medial p, as mdked {made), 
cladde ‘ clad.' 

Note i. — Early Midland differs mainly in a somewhat fuller preservation of 
OE. forms. Analogical changes, also, had not been fully carried out, Orm 
having hahben, libben, seggen, leggen from OE. forms with bb, eg. 

Note 2. — Nth. agrees with Midland in the main, but the endings of the 
present indicative are characteristic, as i ^ (-, es) ; 2, 3 es; pi. i, 2, 3 es (e 
when followed immediately by the personal pronoun). The infinitive has no 
final n and often no e remaining, as bind ‘ bind,’ for Ml. brndet^i). Syncopated 
forms of the present are exceedingly rare ; the preterit of the weak verb has, in 
general, lost its personal endings; the present participle ends in and (e), and the 
prefix of the past participle, z (y), OE. ge, is wholly lost. Slh. retains OE. 
weak verbs of the second class with infinitives in fe(n) and the following 
endings in the indicative present ; Sg. i ze (f, j'e,y) ; PI. r, 2 , 3 uj> (Jetli). OF. 
verbs in ier and sometimes those in eierox er fall in with this characteristic Sth. 
class. Sth. also often has infinitives in lett from OE. ian after r, and present stems 
with gg<, OE. eg, bb < OE. bb. In the second and third persons es (r) for s is 
unknown ; syncopated forms are very common, as also those with assimilation 
and simplification of consonants ; the present participle ends in tnde (seldom 
ende), later inge ; the prefix i i^y) of the past participle is often retained. All 
other verbs have ep {eih) in the plural. The London dialect seldom retains the 
prefix i (y), OE. ge, of the past participle, as in Midland, but Chaucer makes 
extensive use of it in poetry, no doubt for metrical reasons ; see any glossary of 
Chaucer under/ (?). 


THE WEAK VERB ' 

167. The weak verb in Middle English may be divided into two 
classes, distinguished by a preterit tense ending of ed {e) or de (/<?). 

^ Weak verbs are placed first because they are the most numerous class in all 
periods of English, and hence represent regularity in forms as compared with 
all other classes. Besides, this arrangement brings together all minor divisions, 
as strong, preterit-present, and the four anomi^lous verbs. 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


«iY 

The first, with preterit in ede, includes verbs of the OE. first weak 
class with original short stems, except those ending in d ox i; most 
verbs of the OE. second weak class by w^eakening of OE. ode to 
ede; strong verbs with short stems, when becoming weak by analogy; 
and such borrowed verbs as have ranged themselves with them 
because of similar formation. 

j68. Verbs of the second class in Middle English are dis- 
tinguished by a preterit tense-ending de, or ie after stems ending in 
a voiceless consonant. To this class belong polysyllabic verbs of 
the OE. first weak class, together with those having original long 
stems, or short stems ending in d or /, and those with mutation 
only in the present (Sievers, ‘Gr.'§4o7); the small number be- 
longing to the OE. third weak class ; some verbs of the OE. second 
weak class which have lost the connecting vowel of the preterit 
ending ; strong verbs with long stems, when becoming w'eak by 
analogy; and such borrow^ed verbs as have ranged themselves 
w’ith them because of similar formation, especially long stems. 

169. The past participles of both classes usually end in ed. 
Certain verbs of class II, however, have d ox t without connecting 
vowel, as those with mutation only in the present, and the few 
originally belonging to OE. class III. Besides, some verbs ending 
in d, /, have past participles without ending, by reason of earlier 
syncopation of e and simplification of the resulting consonant 
group, as /ed, set, A few others, as those ending in a vowel or 
liquid, also have past participles in d ; for example, flen ^ flee '-fled, 
heren ^\it 2 iX^-herd, 

rjQ, Some irregularities naturally occur. In addition to the 
cases in which ie regularly belongs to the preterit and t to the 
past participle, those endings are sometimes found after consonants 
voiced in the present but becoming voiceless in the other forms 
after syncopation of the connecting vowel e ; examples are losen-- 
losie-lost " lose-lost,' clpen-ckfte-cleft ‘ cleave-cleft.' Some verbs 
ending in a liquid + ^ change d io t in preterit and participle, as 
wenden-wenie-went, hilden-bilte-hilt ‘ build-built,' girden-girie-^irt 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


cv 


' gird-girt/ This last change is far less common in Nth. Some 
verbs differ in present and preterit by reason of special phonetic 
changes, as hlenchen 'blench, hl2incW -blemie-blemi, mengen 'mingle'- 
meynk-meynt, §48. In §165 attention was called to the develop- 
ment of OE. palatal g after r as in birien ' bury ' ; when OE* 
guttural g followed /, r it regularly became j later w, as in fol^en 
(^folwen) ' follow,' barren {^ 07 'weri) ' borrow.* 

171. Borrowed verbs, with few exceptions, assumed the inflexion 
of the weak verb, following one of the two classes above, according 
as they agreed with one or other in phonetic peculiarities. ON. 
weak verbs were easily received without much change, yet such 
verbs ending in ja, va (y=.wci) follow their presents without those 
endings in English. Examples are eggen < ON. eggja^ gfren < 
gjrva. Verbs from OF. sources almost invariably became weak in 
Middle English. In general their forms depend upon the form of 
the OF, present stem, as ME. chanien < chanter^ plainen^ respondm 
< plaindre^ respondre^ but rendren^ baiiren 'render, batter *< rendre^ 
baire\ moven < 7 novoir\ aisen {pen)^ chasen (cacheti) < aisier, 
chaster (Picard cachier) ' ease, chace, catch ' ; but marten ' marry,' 
carten ' carry,' replien 'reply,* studten ' study,' denten ' deny.’ The 
present stem is especially important as accounting for ME. verbs 
in -ischen (men) from the OF. pres. pi. in m-, infinitives in zr, as 
finischen < finir ' finish,* florischen^ nurischen^ punischen^ rejoissen 
' rejoice,* traissen (betraissen) beside iraten {beiraieti) ' betray,' 
obeischen {pbeissen) beside obeien 'obey.* Double forms in OF. 
account for certain peculiarities in ME. verbs, as the two forms 
cldmen, claimen ' claim.' A few verbs are formed from OF. past 
participles used as adjectives, as clpen^ pdnien fathkn 'faint, 

feint' beside feinen 'feign,' enoinkn (anointen) 'anoint'; cf. OF. 
clore-clos, peindre-peint^ feindr e-feint^ enoindre-enoint. In late 
Middle English other verbs were similarly formed from OF. or Lat. 
perfect participles first adopted as adjectives; cf. credt 'created,' 
desoldie 'desolated' and the verbs from them. The greater number 
of borrowed verbs assumed the forms of class I, but some, especially 



cvi GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 

those ending in a vowel, took the preterit de of class II ; examples 
are crien ‘ cry ^—cryde^ payen ‘ pay ^—pcyde. By analogy of lacchen-' 
lauyie—lau^f ^ seize, ^ and others of its class, OF . cacche^i ' seize, 
catch' formed its preterit and participle as caughie-caught. 

Note.— N th. agrees with Ml. Sth. retains infinitives in ten from OF. verbs 
in the latter falling in with OE. weak verbs of the second class in that 
dialect. 


THE STRONG VERB 

172. This class, as in Old English, includes gradation verbs, axid 
those with original reduplication, the former including several minor 
divisions. The most noticeable change in strong verbs during 
ME. times is that many of them have become weak by analogy of 
the great weak class. On the other hand, a very few new ones 
appear, owing to borrowings from Norse and to rare analogical 
formations. Strong verbs also show a tendency toward the reduc- 
tion of the two preterit stems of most OE. strong verbs to one, 
but this tendency was not fully carried out until modern times. 
It results naturally from the fact that even in Old English the 
preterits of reduplication verbs, of those of class VI, and some of 
class V had the same stem vowel in both singular and plural. 
The reduction of the four OE. stems to three was further influenced 
by the similar vowel in preterit plural and past participle of verbs 
belonging to class I and most of class III, and by the regularizing 
of consonants in verbs originally having grammatical change. 

Note. — In this reduction of preterit stems the dialects differ markedly. Nth. 
has lost one stem, usually the plural, almost entirely. Sth. retains both forms 
as a rule. Midland stands between the two in this respect, though agreeing 
more nearly with Sth. through most of the period. With this general state- 
ment, dialectal differences in the various classes need not be noted, except in 
special cases. Differences due to the different phonologies of the dialects have 
been sufficiently exemplified in the part on Phonology. 

173. The inflexional endings of strong verbs have been shown 
in § 163. The preterit second singular is often without ending. 
There are also few peculiarities of strong stems not already noted. 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


cvii 


Attention has already been called to the change in present stems 
ending in eg, and those which retained z after r in Old English, 
§ 165. Variations originally due to mutation in second and third 
singular present indicative have also disappeared by the influence 
of the unmutated forms, though mutation was never so common in 
the Anglian dialects as in West Saxon (Sievers, ^Gr/ § 371, 
anm. 5 f). 

Note. — Nth. seldom preserves the e of the second person preterit indicative, 
while in Sth. it is not uncommon. Sth. also preserves OE. eg of verb stems as 
gg{ — dzh) more commonly than Midland. 

174* Gradation verbs belong to six sub-classes, as in Old 
English, with the following vowels in their various stems, — the 
present, preterit singular, preterit plural, and past participle le- 
spectively ^ : 

i. e{u)-1-y[f)-g ^ - a {ej)- e, g-e{t) 

3. t {e)-aQ)-u{pu,g)-g,u{pu) 6 . a(g, a) - o- a- a(d, /, o) 

175. Verbs of class I are exemplified by driven ' drive 
driven {dr^f ^--driven ; writen ‘ vjxilQ^-wr^i-wriien {vurni^-wri/en ] 
rtden ‘ ride ’-rgd-riden {ryd)-riden. The introduction of the preterit 
singular vowel in the plural is especially to be noticed as suggesting 
the Modern English form. The verb siz^en {sizczi) ^ ascend ' has a 
pret. sfeij as if from OE. *sieah of the second class or possibly from 
Norse. To verbs which regularly belong here from OE. times 
must be added two borrowed verbs, riven ^ rive ' from Norse, and 
striven ' strive ’ from French, the latter with strong forms by analogy. 
The weak verb chiden ‘ chide ' also shows strong forms as early as 
the thirteenth century'- ; compare chidden, a past participle, in ^ Gen. 
and Ex.’ 1927. 

' The order of these sub-classes is unimportant, except that sub-classes 1-5 
develop from the Teutonic e-a, and 6 from gradation series. In England 
the reduplication verbs are sometimes called class I, and the above are then 
given in the order 6, 4, 5, 3, i, 2, Streitberg, followed by Kaluza, adopts the 
new order 5, 4, 3, i, 2, 6, 



cviii GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 

176. Of the contract verbs belonging to this class, only pin 
(thee) ‘thrive, prosper,’ and wren (prieri) ‘ cover, conceal ’ seem to 
be preserved. Even in Old English, too, these had been influenced 
by verbs of class II, so that some of their forms still correspond 
■with those of that class. The first has preterit sing, peg, pret. plur. 
and past part pggen, later Powen; the second, pret. sing, wre^ 
(wreigh), pret. plur. and past part, wri^en {wrejen). 

Note.— Early ML and Nth. retain (Tin pt sg. in accordance ndth §§ 5, 43. 

177. Cl a ss II early adopted a preterit plural with the stem vowel 
p, by analogy of the past participle, though occasionally the vowel 
of the preterit singular was introduced into the plural. Examples 
of verbs which are fairly regular are shiten ‘shoot ’-shp-shgten (sfqt)- 
shgten | chesen ‘ choose ’ —chjs—chgsnt (^chp)—chpen, the latter with s 
instead of r in preterit plural and past participle by analogy of the 
remaining stems (OE. curon-coren). A form with u in the present 
is shuven ‘shove’— (shgf^i—shgven—shgven’, with change of 
consonant due to Vemer’s law, sepen ‘ seethe ’-sgp-sgden-sgden ; 
lisen ‘ lose’-//r {Ia 5 )-lpen, (lpt)-lpen; flegen {flyen) ‘&y’-fl!g (/«)- 
flggen (flmaenyflggen (flmioeii). Biden shows influence of bidden 
(class V) in forms and meaning. . 

178. Weak forms are found beside the strong in some cases, as 
crepen ‘ crttp’-crepie-crept, beside crgp {crgp)-crgpen-crgpen, and 
lisen ‘lose ’-Igste-Igsi beside the strong forms above. The contract 
verb flen (OE. flion) ‘flee’ has the same preterit zsJUgen (flyen) 
‘ fly,’ and there is in other respects much confusion betw'een the 
two. The other contract verb, tin ‘ draw,’ has preterit igh (tei) and 
past part, tggen (towen). 

Note.— Grammatical change disappears during the period except in se}en 
‘seethe/ though past participles sometimes preserve the original consonant 
when used mainly as adjectives. 

179. Class III consists of two subdivisions as the present stem 
has e or the latter before a nasal as in Old English. Both 
classes show occasional intrusion of the vowel of the singular 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


cix 


preterit into the plural. Verbs with e in the present stem are 
exemplified by helpen ‘help^-^dz^ (holp^-holpen-holpen) swellen 
‘ swell ^ —swalswollen-^swolleit, A few show peculiarities due to 
lengthening in accordance with § 72, z%}elde 7 t {yelden) ‘ yield^-ygld 
[yald)-^glden {^ygldeny-^glden (^yglden). The verb 'fight' has 
z'from original e in the present stem, according to § 22, 2 ; its 
remaining principal parts are /aj^ {faughi)--foyien {^foughien)-fopen 
{foughkn). The verb meaning ‘ to become' (OE. weordan, North. 
worpan) early appears as wurpen {yDorpen)-wurp {worp, warp)- 
wurpen (worpen)-wti7pen {worpen) without change oi p to d in the 
last two forms, and with u (p) in all stems, by influence of pre- 
ceding (§ 2 5). Similarly OE. swelgen appears as swelyeji {swelwen, 
swolwe7t) ' swallow,' and develops a weak past participle swoljed 
{swolwed). Here also may be mentioned hresien ‘burst' with 
preterit singular Irast and hrosi (compare § 76, ;z, 2). OE. hr eg dan 
becomes hreiden (prede?i)-breid—broiden—broiden. 

180. The more numerous subdivision, with i in the present stem 

before an original nasal + consonant, is exemplified by winnen 
' strive, win ^ -wan-wunnen-{yobnnen)-wbnnen ; drinken ‘ dnxdeP —drank 
^drbnken-drbriken; springen " -sprang (sprgng)-sprdngen- 

sprbngen, the latter with g in preterit singular, beside a, according 
to § 17. The 0 of preterit plural and past participle is of course 
orthographic for u (§ 27). A few verbs have lengthened vowels in 
all forms, as finden ‘ find '-fgnd {/dnd)-/gnden {fdund€n)-f 6 unden, 
the only others of this sort being Innden, grinden, winden ‘bind, 
grind, wind.' The verb rinmn ‘ run ’ has a present, in <?, as rennen, 
with the remaining forms regular. Similarly brennen ‘ burn ' has e 
in the present, though like several others belonging to this class it 
has become weak. The preterit of gvnnen ‘ begin ' is frequently 
used as a preterit auxiliary in such expressions as gan gg ‘ went, 
did go.' 

Note. — In late Nth. begin developed a weak pret. beg^pe by analogy of 
coupe. The pret. gan also appears as oan^ as sometimes in Ml. 

181. Class IV is a small class, as in Old English, and it early 



cx 


GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


shows a tendency to the introduction of the vowel of the past 
participle into the preterit plural, occasionally the preterit singular. 
Verbs which are most nearly regular are sf^lc7i ‘ steal ’sialsielen- 
siplen ; sh^rejz ‘ shear ^ -shar—shererishyren. With o forms as above, 
hlren ^ bear ^-bar {bQ7\ ber)-beren (hgrefi)-hgren ; broken ^ break 
brak-hreken {brgken)-brgken. Quite irregular, as in Old English, 
are Jiimen (nemen^ perhaps Norse) "take '-nam {nd7?i)-7idmen {ndTTiezi, 
fia77t)-7mmen, and cu77ie7i (cdme7i) " come ’-cam {cd77i)-c577ie7i {edmett)- 
cimien {cd77ie7z\ 

182 . To this class, which originally contained brgkan "break' 
irregularly, several others of class V began to attach themselves by 
assuming past participles with the vowel 0 beside e. Examples are 
given under the class to which they originally belonged. 

Note. — For g (eMl. Nth. d) instead of e (Sth. |) in the pret. pi. of this and 
the following class, see §§ 18, 43. 

183 . Class V, also a small class in Old English, is made smaller 
during Middle English by the tendency of verbs originally belong- 
ing here to assume forms of class IV, and thus i*ange themselves 
with that class by analogy. Examples of those that still belong 
here in all their forms are mgien ^ —mai-meteTt-metm*, pm 
" eat ’-U {at)-eien-eie7t. Verbs with original t in the present stem 
(Sievers, "Gr.' §§ 391 - 3 ) are exemplified by siiieTt ^ ^iVsaiseieTi- 
seieTi, The verb pveTi {jeveT^, with z from original e, has preterits 
^a/-jevdn^ past participle ^iveTi like the infinitive; besides, its 
initial j gradually gives way to g, under the influence of Norse 
geve "give,' as also in MEu.^eleTt " get' by influence of Norse gek. 
Irregular, by reason of the final consonants of the stem, is Uggen^ 
later Ubti "lie, rtcXmQ’ -lay-leyeTtr-kyefi, with analogical present 
(§ 1 65 ). BiddeTt shows influence of hedezi (ckss II) in forms and 
meaning. The preterit quojf {guoihi quod)j alone remaining from 
OE. cwedazi " say,' perhaps has its vow'el 0 by lack of stress in the 
sentence (§ 18 ). The only contract verb retained, sen " see,' has 
also various forms for its remaining principal parts, as sey (saw. 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION cd 

saugh)seye?i (sawen^ s^wen, sayeri^-seyen {si?i, sogen^ sowen). Verbs 
which have been influenced by class IV are as follows : — 
wr^ken ‘ 2.vQngQ^'—wrak-wreken-wreken (wrgken), 

'Sp§ken ' ^^tzkjSpak-speken {spdken, spphen)spgken {speketi), 
wpven ‘ \Jt‘s:^tj-waf—wefe7i—wgven (weven). 
dr^en ‘ kill ^-drap {drgp)-drepen {drapet^-drgpen, 

^cten ^ get {ygi)-^ete7t-^eten {^gk7i). 

Note. — Contrary to the rule, change of s to r by Vemer’s Law remains in 
was-weren, originally belonging here but defective and associated with ben ‘ be.^ 

184 . Class VI seems to present greater irregularities than in Old 
English, owing to various phonetic causes. Most verbs have 
lengthened vowels in present and past participle, as fare-foT'-foreti 
-fdrm^ forsaken ^ ior^2ikQ^-/orsok-fors5ken-forsdkefi, To these 
have been added taken ^ take '"-tok-foken-idken from Norse. Verbs 
with mutated presents suffer various changes. A new form with 
unmutated a appears in shdpen ‘ shape "shdp-shdpen-shdpeny some- 
times in siappen beside the prevailing sieppen, which soon acquires 
weak forms as well. The infinitive of la^hen (laujen, lauhwen) 

^ laugh '-4dh {Iotigh)-lowen-Ioghen {lowen)-Iaujken {laughen) must 
also have been influenced by the past participle (cf. Orm’s lahhph- 
enn. OE. sceddan ' injure ^ gave place to skdpen ^ scathe ' < ON. 
skada, a weak verb. On the other hand, swgren ‘ swear ’ and 
hfven ‘ heave/ have retained present stems in e (j), but have been 
influenced by verbs of class IV. Their principal parts are swjren- 
swgr {swar)-swgren {swereri)swgren {swgrn) ; hgve7i-Jigf\hafY’ 
hgfen-hgmn. Verbs with stem in OE. g have forms like dra^en 
{drawen')—drdy {drouf)—dro^en {drowen)-drajen (draweti). As in 
Old English standen ‘ stand ’ has n in the present and past participle 
only. ME. waxen ‘ grow/ originally belonging fhere, has fallen in 
with the reduplication verbs, and waschen ‘wish^ has both pre- 
terits, wdsch {wesch, weuch). By analogy of verbs of this class, 
qudken ' quake,' a weak verb, has acquired a strong preterit quoh 

185 . Contract verbs, sign {stgri) * slay ’ and Jign {fgn) ‘ flay ' have 
the following principal parts : sldn [sl^)~sldg {slug, slough, slow)- 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


tsSi 

slogen [slowen, slugen^ slagaft)-slawen [slayeti) ; flon (fli^-flogh 
i^floii^-flowen-jiawen [Jlain). 

186. Verbs with original reduplication are regular in having in the 
preterit e, from OE. eo, or ew from OE. eow^ while the vowels of 
the present and past participle differ considerably owing to various 
phonetic changes of OE. originals. Examples of these with 
preterits in fallen ^fair ~/^7 {fiiy/allen; Ukn Oet, allow 
(latyUien {lalen) ; hglden ' hold ^^held-hglde?i. Those with preterits 
in ew are exemplified by hlowen ^blow as the wind ^ ^hlew-hlowen \ 
crrowen orow '-grew-growen ; hewen ‘ hew ' -hcw-hewcn. The last 
example *shows how the distinctive forms of Old English became 
one in Middle English, after which the verb frequently became 
weak. The verb hgten ‘ call, promise ' (OE. hdian) has two preterits 
depending on the two OE. forms heht and hef, as hihi {hight, 
Mghie) and het. At the same time hihie became present as well 
as past, and the OE. passive haite ‘ am called ' became a past. 
The OE. contracts fin ‘ seize/ hon ^ hang/ soon gave way before 
new infinitives fangen, hangen under the influence of the past 
participles, while a weak fangen was adopted from ON. fanga and 
OE. hangian became ML hafigen. Many of the reduplication 
verbs also have weak forms, as sleple, wepie, walkede, dradde, 
‘ dreaded.' 

THE PRETERIT-PRESENT VERBS 

187. The preterit-present verbs show no exceptional changes 
from OE. times beyond the loss of some of their number, and of 
certain forms, as the infinitive. The more important forms in the 
several classes of strong verbs to which they originally belonged 
are as follows : — 

I. Two verbs gd^n> (pwen^ 'owe, have^ and wiien 'know ; inf. 
g^en {owed) ; pres, indie, owe, owest, owep {oweth)-owen ; pres. subj. 
owe-oz&en; pret, ajle {gjle, aughte, oughle); inf. wiien \ pres, indie. 
wgt, wgsi, wgl— wiien {wgi) j pres, sdbywiie] imp. wz'/e^ pies. part. 
witmde {witnigi) ; pret. wisi (jxiiste) ; past part. wM 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


cxiii 


Note. — Early Ml. haswd^j d^en\ Nth. dgh {awe) in inf. and pres, indie., 
aght in pret., in accordance with their phonologies. Negative forms of witen 
are niten~ngt (Nth. nai) -niste^ &c. Sth. has wiiten^ nuten^ See., from IWS- 
wytan^ nytan, 

III. Three verbs, cumten ‘ be able, can ^ and durren ‘ dare,’ 
purven ‘need’; inf, ctmnen (connen); pres, indie, can {con), canst, 
can {con)-cunen {cunnen) ; pres. subj. cun7ie {cdnne)-cunnen {connen); 
pret. cupe {couth, cduihe, cdude). 

Inf. dw'ren {duren); pres, indie, dar, darst, dar-dor (dar); pres* 
subj. durre {ddre)-durt'en ; pret. durste {dorste, dirste). 

Inf. purven ; pres, indie, parf, parf{f), parf-purven ; pres, 
subj. purve-purven ; pret. purfte {porfte, porte)-purfien. 

Note. — N th. has no such forms as con^ conne, 

IV. Pres, .indie, shal, shall, shal-simllen {shul, shdl, shat) ; pres, 
subj. schule—schulen ; pret. sholde {schulde, schold, scholde), . 

Note. — N th. has sal-suld in accordance with its phonology. It also retains 

pres, indie, mon ‘ remember, have in mind, must/ -mune ; pres. subj. mune ; 

pret. mdnd {jfiunde), 

V. Inf. mujen {mowen); pres, indie, mai, miht {mat, mayest), 
mai-mdwen {mow, may); pres. subj. mdwe-mdwen; pret. mi^te 
{yiihte, mighie, moughte). 

Note. — N th. has only pres, mat, pret. might (moght), 

w ** V 

VI. Pres, indie, mot, most, mot-moten {most) ; pres. subj. mote-- 
mokn ; pret. moste {muste), 

i88. In the earlier part of the period relics of several other 
preterit-presents are also found, as dugen ^ avail ’ (class II), unnen 
^ grant ’ (class III) ; munen ‘ be mindful ’ (class IV), but these soon 
disappear, though a pres, and pret. of munen occur in Nth- (see 
above). Relics of the old strong past participles of these verbs are 
found in the adj.-adv. wis {iwis) ‘ certain, certainly,’ and the adj; 
owen (eMl. Nth. d^en, dgen) ^own.^ 



cxiv 


GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


THE ANOMALOUS VERBS 

189. Four verbs are quite anomalous in the number and 
character of their forms. They are ben {be) ^ be/ willen ^vill/ don 
< do/ ggn ‘ go/ These have the following forms : — 

1. Ben {he) ^be/ Pres, indie, am, art {eri), is {es), and be, best, 
hep\ plur, arn {are), bin {be); pres, subj, be, plur. hen {he); pret. 
was, Were {wgre, was), was ; plur. weren {waren, wgreti) ; pret. 
subj. wire-wiren {wgren^; imp. bi-bep {heth); past part, ben 
{bine), 

Note i. In early Midland, as Oim, sometimes a little later also, the 

present forms best, heop, pi. sinden, are found, and. si as pres. subj. 

Note 2. — Nth. has for present indie, sg. am, ert {art, es), is {es) ; pi. er (^ar, 
ern, es) ; also third sg. his, pi. hen {his) ; pret. sg. was {wes), pi. wir {wire, 
ware, weir, was)* Sth. has pres, indie, second sg. ej‘t, pi. bl^o} {hep, hup) ; 
subj. hio, pi. hion ; pret. was, wfre, was, pi. wireu ; imp, heo-beop ; inf. hion ; 
past part, ibeon {iben, ybSn). Early Sth, also has the gerund, or inflected 
infinitive bionne* 

2. Willen ' will.’ Pres, indie, mil {zvoi), wilt (poU), wil {wol) ; 
plur. wiln {wil, woln, wot) ; pres. subj. wile (pole) ; pret. wolde 
(pilde), woldesl {post, wilde), wolde {pilde, walde, welde); plur. 
wolden {wold, welde), A negative form, nillen "will not’ also 
occurs. 

Note. — Nth. has pres, indie, sg. and pi. wil {will, wille, wel); pret. wald 
{wild, weld)^ Sth. uses pres, indie, wule [wiille, ich ulle, ich oUe = ich wulle), 
wult, wule ; pi. wiillep ; pres. subj. wzile-wiitlen \ pret. wolde, 

3. Don {do) "do/ Pres, indie, do, dost, ddp {doth); plur. don; 
subj. do-don ; imp. db-ddp {doth) ; pres. part, doende {doinge) ; pret. 
dide {dide) ; past part, don {do). 

Note. — Nth. has pres, indie, di, dos {dose, duse) ; pi. do {dose, don) ; pres, 
subj. sg. and pi. di; imp. do-do {dos); pret. did {ded)-did {dide); pres. part. 
doand; past part, don {dune). Sth. has pres, indie, do, dest, dip; pi. dip 
{doth) 5 pret dilde ; pres. part, donde ; past part idon, 

4. Gpn [gfj ‘ go.’ Pres, indie, ggst, ggfi {ggth) ; plur. ggn ; 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


CX7 


pres. subj. gg-gQp {ggth)\ pres. part, ggend {ggmg). The preterit 
is supplied by a different root, in the earlier period by ^ede ( pde, 
yede), OE. geeode, later by wente-wenten from wenden ^ wend, go,’ 

Note. — Nth. has inf. gdn{gd) ; pres, indie, gd, gas {gdse, gais^^ gas {gdsc, 
gais); pres. snbj.^5-^a imp.^d-^^ (gdn)) {gas, goes, gais)’, 

past part, gdn {gdne, gain) ; pret. supplied hy went. Sth. has inf. ggn ; 
pres, indie, gg, gest^ ge) (geth) ; pi. ggf {ggth) ; pres. subj. gg-ggn ; pret. iode 
(Jede, ^ode). 


THE ADVERB 

190. Many adverbs in Middle English do not differ from their 
Old English forms, except for phonetic changes common to them 
with other words. They are based on adjective, substantive, and 
pronominal roots, and are both simple and compound. Simple 
adverbs, based on adjectives, end in e, like {Jt, 0), mge (Itnge). 
Those of the first class include adverbs which retain OE. e, or have 
e from a by weakening, as so/te ^ softly,' soj^e ' in truth,' sotu (OE. 
sond) ^ soon ' ; those of the second, adverbs which ended in Rce in 
OE., and many which assumed this ending in Middle English, as 
hdrdUke (hdrdfi) ^ hardly,' sopUke {soplt) ^ soothly ' ; to the third, 
those ending in inga, enga, unga {Iinga, lenga, lungd) in Old Eng- 
lish, as allunge ^ wholly.' During the period those of the first class 
gradually lost final <?, and thus had the same form as the corre- 
sponding adjectives. With them came to be associated many 
adverbs from Old French which had the same form as the corre- 
sponding adjectives, as just, very^ quite. The second adverbial 
ending, Uke, was gradually weakened until it became confused with 
the adjective ending U {ly), OE. lie, which henceforth came to be 
the distinctive adverbial ending and was greatly extended in its use 
with both native and foreign words. The third ending above is 
least frequent of all, and was not extended in the ME. period. 

191. Adverbs, formed from the oblique cases of adjectives or 
substantives in Old English, also remain in Middle English. These 
are most commonly genitives in es, the masculine-neuter ending, 



CXTl 


GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


as elles ‘ else/ u?iwares ^ unawares/ dates ' by day/ nihks ‘ by night/ 
nedes ' needs.’ This ending was considerably extended in its use 
in ‘Middle English, as to adjectives otherwise ending in znge 
{linge), and to nouns without regard to original gender. Old 
accusatives are llieJ^ lit * little/ ‘ formerly/ fully, ^endh 
{enough, anough\ Old datives are sgre, seldom, whilom, relics of 
OE. dative-instrumental singulars or plurals. Neither of these 
last two case-forms was frequently used in forming ME. adverbs, 
and many formed in OE. gradually disappeared. 

192. Pure pronominal adverbs are when, ' thus,’ hu {hou) 
‘ how/ whf ' why,’ Jian {pen\ whan {when). Adverbs of place, 
based on adjective or pronominal roots, commonly have the ending 
en, from OE. an, as in case of those signifying ^ where ’ or ‘ whence.! 
Examples of adverbs signifying ‘ place where ’ are tnnen {itine) ^ in, 
within/ uien {uie) ‘out,’ fgren {fgrn,fgre) ^before’; of those signi- 
fying ^ place from which ’ hennen {henne) * hence/ hwennen {hwenne, 
whenne) ' whence,’ {pl^ Trom the east.’ To this class was 
added also some Norse forms, as hepen ^ hence/ pepen ^ thence/ 
On the other hand, some of these adverbs have es instead of en in 
late Midland by extension of the es ending, as already mentioned 
above. A few adverbs denoting " place whither ' end in der, origin- 
ally comparative, as hider ‘ hither,’ pider ‘ thither,’ and perhaps by 
influence of pnder. 

193. Compound adverbs are frequent, some being of OE. origin, 
some of Middle English formation. As belonging to the former, 
those ending in like might be counted, although this had become 
a well-established adverbial ending in OE. Better examples are 
those ending in ward, OE. weard, as upward, supward ^ southward/ 
and mek, OM. melum, as dropmele ‘drop by drop.’ To these 
were added in Middle English many ending in ful, df, ‘ part,’ lime, 
while, way, wise, and others. Still other compound adverbs are 
made up of a prefix, the relic of an older preposition, and a noun 
or pronoun, as hmde, away, adum ‘ adown,’ forpi ‘ because/ 
'therein,’ ‘ thereof.’ Such adverbs as alway {always), sum- 



GRAMMATICAL mTRODUCTION cxvil 

lime, sumwhile, are made up of an indefinite pronoun and a noun, 
and such as within, withouien (withoute) of two adverbs. 

Note i. — In early Midland adverbs differ little from the later time except as 
they conform somewhat more nearly to OE. forms. 

Note 2. — The principal variations of the dialects are as follows. Nth. 
shows the loss of final e in most adverbs, so that adjectives and corresponding 
adverbs are invariable as a rule. The ending Ii/ee was early weakened to Iz 
(Jy), and in its place Norse -leiki is sometimes found, as hardlaike ‘ hardly.’ 
The ending hige (tinge) frequently becomes i?zges (tinges), and the es ending is 
otherwise extended, as to numeral adverbs dnes ‘onqe,’ &c. The Norse 
adverbs of place are much more common, as /zej>e 7 z ‘ hence,’ que]}en ‘ whence.’ 
Among compound adverbs. Nth. uses the Norse suffix gate ‘ way, manner,’ as 
in atgdte ‘ dbN&jsi’ fiusgdte ^ in this manner,’ while forms like uiwitli ‘ without/ 
forwiih ‘before,’ are more common. The preposition on, when becoming 
a prefix, remains on (0), as in obove ‘above,’ onmz ‘ anon,’ ozzUve (olive) ‘ alive.’ 
Sth. retains the e ending, even where wholly lost in other dialects, as in the 
numeral adverbs gne ‘once,’ &c- The Sth. form of OE. lue is lutie, which is 
not weakened to tz (ly), and inge (tinge) does not become inges (tinges). The 
ending en (e) is more extended in its use. Norse forms are not found, and OE. 
on, when becoming a prefix, is weakened to azz (a) as in alive, about, angn. 

194. The comparative and superlative of the adjective may be 
used as an adverb without change. In addition, a few adverbs not 
derived from adjectives have comparative endings. A few mono- 
syllabic adverbs with mutation remain from OE. times, as het 
‘better,’ /r (/rf) ‘ere,’ leng ‘longer’; compare Sievers, ‘Gr/ 

§ 323- 

THE PREPOSITION. 

195. Little need be said of Middle English prepositions, since 
they present no serious difficulties, and show few changes not 
easily understood from the ordinary changes in phonology* Most 
OE. prepositions were preserved in Middle English, and some few 
were added from other sources, as Norse. Thus frg ‘ from ’ is 
derived from Norse fra, as is probably umh {tmi), cognate with 
OE.j/mhe ^ around.' Some few prepositions altered their meaning, 
as wi^ ‘ with/ which more commonly meant ‘ against ’ in Old Eng- 
lish, In Middle English it ordinarily came to mean ‘ with/ doubt- 



cxviii 


GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


less through use in such expressions as fight with, in which it 
could have either signification. W hen this came to be true, mid 
in the latter meaning gradually disappeared. Simple prepositions 
from OF. were adopted in certain phrases, as par amur, par fai, 
paramriiure {paraunier), and certain OF. words came to be used 
as prepositions; examples are r^d ‘round/ except y maugre Mn 
spite of/ save, acordaunty later acording. Compound prepositions 
and prepositional phrases became common in Middle English, as 
a^ein {again) y a^eineSy amgngy algngy beside y ne^hgnd (nerhgnd) ‘ near 
at hand, near,' iowardy utfaken ‘except/ OF. words were also 
united in these phrases as hi cause ofy he rgson ofy in regard ofy 
ardundy according td» 

Note. — It is naturally impossible to separate dialects on the basis of prepo- 
sitions only, but some prepositions seem almost peculiar to certain dialectal 
divisions. Thus Nth. uses at and til (pniily until) for ^‘Jand nntOy amel {pmely 
tmely imel) for hetwcUy and nvi) more commonly instead of mid, Sth. has an 
{a) for <>7ty iOy untOy and vied for wip, 

THE CONJUNCTION 

196. Old English conjunctions in general remain in Middle 
English, subject to such changes as were natural to their phonetic 
forms. Among those deserving special mention are eiper {ei^per) 
‘either,' ouper {gper, or) ‘or,’ sipen {sipeneSy sipe, sitk, sepCy See,) 
‘since/ Nth, siny sen. Among correlative conjunctions, pe , , ,pe 
remain from OE./y \ , ^Py with different vowel by analogy of pe\ 
but OE. suod , . . swd gave place to alswg . - . asey ox as ,, , as. 
From OE. correlatives and preceding indefinite pronouns also arose 
the new correlatives of Middle English, as eiper (gper) ... or, 
neiper {ngper) . . . nor, in which or, nor are weakened forms of the 
indefinite gpery OE. ahweeffer, dwder. The common negative of 
Middle English is ne, which often suffers apocope of e and unites 
with the following word as in Old English. The OE. nd, from 
ne + dy remained sometimes in ng, as to-day in no better y no more of 
it but at the same time a new negative nat {not), based on OE. 



GRAMMA TICAL INTRODUCTION cxix 

nawiht ^ naught/ came into use and gradually supplanted both of 
the others in most situations. Sometimes both ne and nat (not) 
were used in the same sentence. In Middle English also, the 
Norse negative net (nay) was adopted, as was also the affirmative ei 
(ay) beside the OE. affirmative ^es ( yes\ 

THE INTERJECTION 

197. Middle English interjections come from Old English, as Ig, 
Q (yJt)^ wg, with the weak forms la, a (later perhaps Id, d, dh), wa 
(walawa). From Norse came wei(wat) ^ woe,^ weilawei (wailawai), 
and hoi from Old French alas, fy. The adoption of foreign 
interjections is probably mainly of literary origin. 


SYNTAX 

WORD ORDER 

198. The order of words in early Middle English prose follows 
that of the older language in the freedom of word-position. This 
is especially true of the verb, which may appear at the end of the 
clause, that is after object or modifiers, or before the subject 
(inverted order). Examples of the first in principal clauses are : 
Qc Crist it ne wolde (i, 8) ; and te Lundenisce folc him underfeng 
(2, 8) ; and te king it hescet (2, 13) ; and hi tbgmdere cbmen (2, 16). 
Subordinate clauses with final verb are even more common : pe per 
wmron (i, 6) ; pd he nan mgr ne mihie (i, 7) ; dat he mlde man was 
(2, 27). The verb precedes the subject even more frequently than 
it ends the clause. Compare cbm Henri (1,1); "coas it noht (i, 8) ; 
warik pi king dgd (i, 18) ; and for hi him luvedm God and god men 





GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


‘and because God and good men loved him’ (4, 27); and in 
subordinate clauses, wtsie pe king (i, 6), pa pesiTede dat 
(i, 14) ; pd dtden hi alle wimder (2, 28). The subjunctive inverted 
appears in C0771B pdu ‘if thou shouldst come (^2, 8) j wife he 
never sg hgly man ‘if he were, &c.’ (74? Poetical usage 

naturally shows metrical inversion, and some greater liberties are 
taken than in the modern period. As Middle English develops, the 
order of the modern language more and more appears. 

Note. — In s)mtax:, as in versification, there are few strongly marked 
dialectal peculiarities. Sth, is most conservative. Nth. most radical. For 
example, early Sth. tends to preserve the older word order. Nth., as later in 
development, shows the modern order; compare Rolle of Hampole, p. 14^ f. 

199- Other peculiarities of word order are not numerous. In 
the early time the appositive sometimes follows the noun, as in 
^enri kmg and Hefiri abbot (i, i); Siephnes hinges (4, sS); pe 
hinges sime Henries (5, 13). When the last usage gave way to 
a phrase for the appositive, it also follows, as mpe hinges suster of 
France (7, i). The predicate modifiers may precede the verb, as 
in godman he wes (2, 3) ; pais he mahede men (2, 4); mam pusend 
hi drdpen mid hunger (3, 18). The adjective sometimes follows the 
noun in prose, but perhaps usually under foreign influence, as in 
^dies everlastand (loi, 24) ; lufe ynesche (144, 14) ; pe hert sorowful 
andmehe (102, 23). It is common for the relative to be separated 
from the antecedent, as in chvre man mihie ‘ every man who 

might ' (2, i); Teobdld . . .pe was abbot 1 7). The final position 
of the adverb, which later, as preposition, preceded the relative, is 
usual, as in he pat at his trist is id ‘ he in whom is all his trust ’ 
15)* III 29), alle he 28 20 the order is the reverse 

of what is now possible. 

aoo. Middle English syntax is loose compared with that of 
to-day. This is shown by the unnecessary repetition of the subject, 
not only as in wan pe ggst it scholde gg (48, 5) ; pe ho^ it seide 
(52, 9); pi wreche peoddare mgre noise he mdked (198, 27)“ but 
also in such cases as wanne hi is ikindkd siilU lid pi leihi (14, 8), 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


cxxi 


instead of ‘when bora the lion lies still'. So the appositive is 
sometimes loosely used instead of a closer syntax, as in Rogingham 
pe casiel (4, 22); Vaspdsian h^s tyme (220, 7); Vaspdsian pe 
emperor hys '^me (220, 17). 

THE NOUN, ADJECTIVE, AND PRONOUN 

201. The oblique cases of the noun retain some older uses. 
Thus the objective genitive persists, as in for ure Drihiines Ime 
‘ for the love of our Lord' (4, 31); ndness kznness shaffie (12, 32), 
So the genitive of inanimate things, as in ie spes grund ‘ the bottom 
of the sea' or ‘the sea bottom' (19, 23). The adverbial genitive 
remains in the phrases here pmkes . . . here unpankes ‘ according to 
their pleasure , . . according to their displeasure or ‘ willingly and 
unwillingly' (6, 31-32). The dative without io appears more 
freely, as in ie king iaf dai ahbotrue an prior ‘to a prior' (i, 9); 
pe wmrse hi wear on him ‘to him '(5, 20); sais m ‘says to us' 
(149, 19). It is used adverbially after certain verbs, as and benam 
him al ‘and took away from him all' (5, 21); he bitagie Idsep his 
ring (24, ii); us sal ben hard ‘it shall be hard for us' (27, ii). 
It is used as an old instrumental in pat God himselve ran on bldde 
‘ on which God himself ran with blood' (78, 3) \ al his wlite mur'd 
ip'es wp ‘with tears' (28, 32). It expresses time in which, as in 
pis gear (i, i); pis geare (2, 18). The ‘accusative without 
preposition denotes duration of time, as in pd nigenUne winire 
(3, 21); nigeniene winire {4, 9). Two accusatives occur wdth 
certain verbs, as in aldat he cuthe dxen him (5, 19). 

202. The adjective syntax is chiefly distinguished by frequent 
use as a noun. Compare for hpie ‘for heaviness’ (35, 20); for 
7 ig newe ‘for no new love' (37, 14); hldinges ‘hiding places' 
(233, 22). The definite form (§ 138) occurs after a demonstrative 
or possessive pronoun, a noun in the possessive, in direct address, 
and when used substantively. The last use is illustrated by the 
examples above. Other examples of the definite form are ie 



cxxii 


GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


Lundentsce folc (5, 33); pe pridde wise (8, 15); piss Englissche 
Idc {1^,22), 

203. The pronoun syntax differs from to-day in several par- 
ticulars. It may be omitted as subject or object, as in dat him 
hr aeon alle pe limes ‘that they broke’, &c. (3, 13); wende id 
legceion ‘ they thought to get ’ (7, 2 ) ; wryihen id dai ‘ twisted them 
so that‘ (3, 8). Again, the subject may be repeated in a pronoun, 
as wan pe ggsi ii scJioIde gg (48, 5); P^ it seide (52, 9). Lack 
of concord between pronoun and antecedent is not uncommon: 
give we ilk a?t pare langdge ‘ if we give each one iheir language ' 
(134, 5 )- 

204. The personal pronoun is used reflexively, as in me nogi 
wgren ‘not protect myself' (22, 19); he luiien him ‘they bowed 
themselves' (25, 3). The plural of the second person is first used 
as a singular in hui gewiS us senden Benjamm (27, 16). Yet the 
singular remains the rule long after the time of this selection. 
The genitive of the personal pronoun is used objectively, as in her 
7iouper ‘neither of them' (6, 16); ure ngn ‘none of us' (28, 6). 
The dative without a preposition is used much more freely than at 
present ; as indirect object in gur silver is gu hrogi aggn (28, 4) ; as 
dative of advantage or disadvantage in dai him hracon ‘that they 
broke for them ' (3, 13); annd fdrpedd ie pin wille ‘ and accom- 
plished for thee thy will' (8, 18); what hire were ‘what was to her 
= the matter with her' (36, 19). An accusative for the genitive 
appears in wart ii war ‘ became aware of it ' (5, 1 2). 

205. The demonstrative is sometimes used for the possessive, as 
in als ihe pm wes ‘as his uncle had been' (2, 20); alle pe limes 
‘all their limbs’ (3, 13). It is also omitted where necessary at 
present, as in ^ric man sdne r^ede oper pe mihie ‘the other' 
(2, i). It is used as an indefinite in wip pai he made ‘with that 
which he made', OE. wip pat pat he mac ode (67, 16); pat under- 
sidndes pat I tell (134, 8)^ The relative pronoun is frequently 
omitted, as in Martin was gehdten ‘ who was called Martin ' (i, ii). 
It precedes its antecedent, as in that pey receyve in forme of hrgd^ 



GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


cxxiii 


hyt is Goddes ho^ (122, 5). The nominative-accusative is used 
for a dative in pai Mrs of hdret M ful irk ^to which &c, (150, 2). 
The relative may refer to a genitive antecedent, as in in his ward 
. . . pat maked him ' in the custody of him who made him ^ 
(67, 28-29); pairs wyll pat aghie ?/‘the will of them that owned 

it’ {147, 13) 

THE VERB AND OTHER PARTS OF SPEECFI 

206 • The verb does not always agree with its subject, especially 
if the latter follows, as in wes al tmfrid andyvel and rcefldc (2, 10) ; 
corn id Flgris writ and sgnde (46, 28). The copula is sometimes 
oniitted, as in wel me ‘ well is to me ’ (32, 3). The impersonal 
verb is common, as in unnc hirrp ^it behooves us two’ (8, 26); 
him Bkede Mt pleased him’ (14, 16); hem drempie ‘it came to 
them in vision’ (21, 13); me wgre lev ere ‘it were pleasanter to 
me’ {22, 21). Change from indirect to direct discourse or the 
reverse often occurs, as in passages at 27, 15-16; 29, i2f.; 
82, 14 f. The auxiliary of the passive for intransitive verbs is still 
the verb to be, as in derde is cumen ‘ dearth has come ’ (30, 25) ; 
he hen cumen (35, 8); hu hit is went (42, 19). 

2070 The inflected tenses are still used with general force, the 
present for present and future, the preterit for all past time. Thus 
the preterit is a past perfect in pd was pe king strengere panne he 
avert §r was ‘ had been ’ (7, 23). On the other hand the com- 
pound tenses are also common, and make more explicit the time 
relations. The preterit tense is also used as a present in clauses of 
unreality, as hu dg him Bkede . . . migie nevre divel witen ‘ may the 
devil never know’ (14, 16-17). 

208. The subjunctive is common in both subjunctive and opta- 
tive senses. Examples are fare ‘if he go ’ (16, 26); du it sgge 
‘ if thou shouldst see it ’ (19, 4) ; ^yf pm hade wolde ^ if thou hadst 
wished’ {102, 20); ware Henri king ‘Henry should be king’ (7, 
x6); pat dper deide hefgre ‘that the other should die before [him]’ 
(45, 2); have ‘may he have’ (77, 29). 



cxxiv 


GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


209. The infinitive without io is common, as in umic hirrp hape 
pa^mkenn (8, 26); dede hem wassen ‘made them wash ^ (29, 3); 
don he ‘made to be^ (34, 13); wende Mr finde ‘thought to find' 
(40, 29). The infinitive as a verbal complement still persists, 
especially in Southern, as in Per com . . . liden ‘ there came . . . 
going' (19 1, 1-2); whan Ardur cunie Iide?i ‘when Arthur may 
come' (19 1, 10). Occasionally a participle is used as a noun, 
perhaps under Latin influence, as in pe sechand Jiym ‘ the [ones] 
seeking him ' (loi, 19). 

210 , Certain uses of adverbs and prepositions may be noted. 
Thus . o o sg are correlative, as in al sg briht sg it were day 
(83, 2)5 and so for as in al is man sg is Us grn (16, 13). The 
preposition toward is divided, as in to Gode ward (16, 21); to de 
heve?te ward (18, 9). 

Note. — Nth. sometimes uses iil (Jill) for Ml., Sth. to, as in id cum }>c till 
‘to come to thee* (140, 2) ; till end ‘to the end*' (141, 3). So also Nth. is 
characterized by the use of at for id, as in nogkt at hide ‘ nought to hide ’(158,5). 


VERSIFICATION 

211. Like modern English verse. Middle English poetry is 
accentual, and the metrical stress regularly coincides with the 
principal or secondary stress of the word as usually pronounced. 
Yet ME. verse shows considerable variety of form. There are 
in this book examples of the older alliterative line, the Latin 
septenarius or line of seven stresses without rime, the same with 
rime, the four and five stressed couplets, and several stanza forms. 
All lines but the alliterative are prevailingly iambic. 

212. The alliterative line is of complicated structure, its principal 
features being two half-lines of two principal stresses each, but 
without syllabic regularity. The half-lines are usually bound 
together by alliteration of the stressed syllables, one in each half- 
line, tw^o in the first and one in the second, or two in each. 
Besides, there may be assonance in the final stressed syllables of 



GRAMMATICAL WTRODUCTION 


cxxv 


the half-lines, or rime with more or less frequency. A good 
example of a verse matching the Old English scheme is, 

Welle lieg is tat liil ^Jat is lievenriche (14, 14). 

But the alliterative syllable of the second half-line is often on the 
second, rather than the first principal stress, as in 

Bl wile weie 59 he wille to dgle nite wenden (14, 3). 

Again, the alliteration may fail altogether in the second half-line, 
as in 

_ / / / 

Qto dust gSer deu tJat he ne cunne is finden (14, 6), 

On the other hand, there may be two alliterative syllables in the 
second half-line, as in 

/ . . y f 

PigteS wi?y Sis wirm and fare'iS on him figtande (17, 21)* 

Crossed alliteration of the forms abah or abba may also occur, as 

* f if 

DragetJ dust wiS his start he dun Steppe'S (14, 5) ; 

iff f 

‘Surg his nfse smel smake ?Jat he axegge (14, 2). 

213, Rime sometimes appears in the alliterative line at the end 
of each half, as in 

if t t 

In a st^n stille he lai til it kam ? 5 ridde dai (15, 12) ; 

or two lines may be bound together into a couplet, as in 

His hgpe is al to Gode ward, and of his luve he l§te 1 S, 

/ / / / 

Dat is te sunne sikerlike, tJus his sigte he hfete'iJ (16, 21-22), 

Again, a couplet may rime finally and in its first half-lines, as 

f , f if 

And tns be ne\ve?J him, ??is man, ??anne he nimetJ t6 kirke, 

Qr he it bitJenken can. hise egen weren mirke (16, 15-16). 
Occasionally rime may appear as a tag to the preceding line, as at 
the bottom of page 14. The rime may entirely supersede allitera- 
tion as a binding force for the half-lines, and couplet structure 
results as on pages 15 and 19; compare also the selection from 
Layamon^s Brut at p. 181. On the other hand alliteration has 
remained an occasional adjunct of all rimed verse j see § 218. 



cxxvi 


GRAMMATICAL INTRODUCTION 


214. The septenarius without rime appears in the selection from 
the Orniulum (p. 18), and its couplet structure in the Poema 
Morale (p. 176) and Gloucester's Chronicle (p. 203). The first is 
stilted verse, the stress of the word not corresponding to the 
metrical stress, as in affierr (8, 13, and 20), unnderr (8, 17). In 
these and other cases we probably are to see the substitution of the 
trochee for the iamb, so common in modern verse. Orm's lines 
are invariably of fifteen syllables each. In other poems the first 
unstressed syllable may be omitted, as in 

t r ! f If f 

Ich sem elder ]jen ich wes a winlre and a Igre (176, i) ; 

or after the cesural pause, as in 

Wei late ic habbe me biJ)oht, bute me God do milce (176, S). 

Robert of Gloucester is considerably less regular in his verse 

structure, often omitting the fifteenth syllable (feminine ending) as 

well as the first, and occasionally unstressed syllables within the 

line, as well as sometimes misplacing accents. 

215. The four-stressed line is normally of eight syllables, as the 
five-stressed is of ten. But any such line may have an extra 
unstressed syllable at the end, as in 

And havety dempt losep to bale (21, 2); 

As riot, hasard, stywes and tavernes (237, 3). 

Besides, a stressed syllable at the beginning of the line may do 
duty for the whole of the first foot, as in 

/ f / / 

Cupen he let fiUe of flures (35, 15)1 

or for the first after the cesural pause, as in 

f / ft 

pe due ])at J)e ring funde (44, 13). 

As in modern verse a trochee may appear for the first iamb, or for 
the first after a cesural pause, the latter as in 

J>e Admiral pg, wel him bitIde (46, 9). 

216. The loss of unstressed syllables has already been treated 
in §§ 80-90. In addition, final unstressed e is elided in poetry 



GRAMMA TICAL INTROD UCTION 


cxxvii 


before a vowel or weak h. Sometimes it is also dropped before 
a consonant, as in 

/ t t t 

Me drempt(e) als ic was wun(e) to don (22, 2). 

Contraction and slurring in other cases will be clear from the 
principles given above. 

217. Perfection in rime is naturally a gradual development. In 
the earliest verse even assonance is sometimes sufficient, as in 

^ / f f 

De kinges kuppe ic hadde on hpnd ; 

De beries S^rmne me ic wrgng (21, 27-28). 

Rime in the consonant and not the vowel of the syllable may be 
found, as in Effraym — hem (24, 23-24). So rime of long and 
short vowels is not unusual, as in win — derm (22, 3-4) ; sperd—§rd 
(22, 29—30); Chanaan — -fordaji (24, 27—28). Rime words also 
differ in the quality of the vowel, especially open and often 
riming with the corresponding close vowels. Examples are sped — 
frigiihld (26, 29-30); l^den — deden (29, 13-14); gn — Pharaon 
(33. 29-30); gpt—Symedn (26, 3-4). 

218. Alliteration has always been an ornament of English 
poetry. When it ceased to be the regular binding feature of the 
half-lines in alliterative verse, it continued as an occasional adjunct 
of the poetic line. In short lines, two or three stressed syllables 
may be bound together by this head-rime. In longer lines, four 
syllables may begin with the same consonant, or with the same or 
different vowels. Examples will be easily found in every selection. 



INDEX 


The numbers refer to paragraphs. 


1 6. 

29. 

Accent, 13. 

Addition (consonant), 
118. 

Adjectives, 138. 
Adverbs, 1 90. 
ai^ 50. 

Alliteration, 218. 
Alliterative line, 213. 
Aphzeresis, 89. 

Apocope, 86, 
Assimilation, 114. 
mi, 55. 

K 93- 
ch, 1 10. 

Comparison, 141. 
Conjunctions, 196. 
Consonantizing, 112. 
Consonants, 91. 

general changes, 112. 
voicing of, i r 3. 

d, 93. 

Dialects of ME., i- 
Diphthongs, 47. 
Dissimilation, 114. 

19. 

e (close), 31, 35- 
^ (open), 31, 32- 
Ecthlipsis, 117. 
ei, 52, 

Elision, 88. 
eu, 67, 

f 98. 

g (stop), 95. 

S,}{dzh), III. 

) (spirant), 103. 

^ if ), 107- 

Genden 120. 


/z, 105. 

i, 12. 

3^- 

Inflexions, 119. 
Interjections, 197* 
iu, 6i. 

/ III. 

k (stop), 94. 

7, 108. 

Lengthening, 72. 
Liquids, 108. 

;//, 109. 

Metathesis, 115. 

109. 

Nasals, 109- 
109. 

Nouns, 122. 
anomalous, 133. 
syntax, 201. 
Numerals, 143. 

24- , 

6 (close), 40, 44. 
g (^en), 40, 41 . 
oi, % 

Orthography, 7. 
ou, gu, 65. 

93- 

Phonology, 16. 
Prepositions, 195. 
Pronouns, 147. 
possessives, 153. 
demonstratives, 154. 
relatives, 157- 
interrogative-indefin- 
ites, 158, 
syntax, 203, 
Pronunciation, 10. 


Quantity, variations in, 
71- 

r, 108. 

Rime, 213, 217. 

s, lOI. 

sch (jK), 102. 
Semivowels, 106. 
Septenarius, 214. 
Shortening, vowel, 76- 
Spirants, 98. 

Stops, 93. 

Stress, word, 13. 
Substitution, consonant, 
116. 

Syllables, unstressed, 80. 
Syncope, 83. 

Syntax, 198. 

9:- 

}), d, 100. 

zi, 26. 
zi, 46. 
zd, 70. 


2', 93» 99- 

Verbs, 162. 
weak, 167. 
strong, 172- 
prctent- present, 187- 
anomalous, 189. 
syntax, 2c6. 

Versification, 211. 

Vocalization of conso- 
nants, 1 1 2. 

Voicing of consonants, 
113- 

Vowels, long, 29. 
short, 16. 


w, 106. 

Word order, 198. 



L THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


A. EARLY EAST MIDLAND 

1 . THE PETERBOROUGH CHRONICLE 

1132. Dis gear com Hem! King 16 ]3is land, pa com Henr! abbot 
amd ^ wreide pe muneces of Burch to pe king forpi ^at ® he wolde 
underpeden tSat mynstre to ClunTe, swa tJat te king was "wel neh 
bepaht and sende efter pe muneces. And purh Codes milce and 
purh pe Biscop ® of Seresberi and te Biscop of Lined and te opre 5 
rl^ men pe per w^ron, pa wiste pe king "Sat he feorde mid swic- 
dom. pa he nan mpr ne mihte, pa wolde he "Sat his nefe sculde 
ben abbot'* in Burch, oc Crist® it ne w^olde. Was it noht swithe 
lang perefter pat te king sende efter him and dide him gyven up ^at 
abbotrice ® of Burch and faren tit of lande ; and te king iaf tJat 10 
abbotrice an piior of Sanct*^ Need, hlartin was ^ehaten. He com 
on Sanct Petres messedei mid micel wurscipe into the minstre, - 
1135. On pis gxre for se King Henri over set te Lammasse. 
And tSat 6per dei pa he lai an slep in scip, pa pestrede pe dsei over 
al landes and ward pe sunne swilc als it ware thre niht aid mone, 1 5 
and ® sterres abQten him at middsei. Wurpen men switJe ofwundred 
and ofdred, and s^den tSat micel ping sculde cumen herefter, swa 
dide ; for pat ilc g^r warth pe king dfd, tSat oper dsei efter Sanct 
Andreas massedsei on Normandi. pa wes trfson a ® pas landes, for 

^ T as often. ® 'iJ only, as usually. ® b. * abb. ® Xpist, as 
usually. ® abbrice. ’ S’, as always. H’. ® an, ^ westre sona. 



2 


/. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


^vric man sone rcevede oj^er ]?e mihte. pa namen his sune and 
his frend and brohten his lie to Engleland^ and bebirleden ^ in Rfd- 
inge. God man he wes and micel seie wes of him. Durste nan 
man misdon \vi^ 5^er on his time. Pais he makede men and der 
Wuaswa bare his byrthen, g5ld and sylvre, durste nan man sei to 5 
him naht bute god. 

Enmang pis ^vas his nefe cumen to Engleland, Stephne de Blais, 
and com to Lundene ; and te Lundenisce folc him underfeng and 
senden asfter pS sercebiscop, Willelm * Curbuil, and halechede him 
to kinge on midewintre dsei. On pis kinges time wes al unfriS 10 
and yfel and raeflac, for agenes him risen sona pa rice men pe 
w^ron swikes, alrefyrst Baldwin de Redvers, and held Execestre 
agenes him ; and te king it besset, and siStSan Baldwin acordede. 
pa tocan pa oSre and helden her castles agenes him, and David 
King of Scotland toe to werrien him. pa, pohwethere pat, here 15 
sandes feorden betwyx heom, and hi togsedere comen and wurtSe 
ssehte, pop it litel forstode. 

1137. Dis g'iere for pe King ® Stephne ofer sie to Normandi and 
ther wes underfangen, forpi tiat hi wenden Sat he sculde ben alswic 
alse the fom wes, and for he hadde get his tresor; ac he todfld it 20 
and scatered sotllce. Micel hadde Henri King gadered gold and 
sylver, and na god ne dide me for his saule tharof. 

pa pe King Stephne to Englaland com, pa makod he his gader- 
ing set Oxeneford and par he nam pe biscop Roger of Sereberi, and 
Alexander Biscop of Lincol and te Canceler Roger, hise neves, and 25 
dide aelle in prisun til hi iafen up here castles, pa the s\txkes under- 
g^ton ?Sat he milde man was and softe and god, and ^na justice ne 
dide, pa diden hi alle wunder. Hi hadden him m'anred maked and 
athes sworen, ac hi nan treuthe ne heolden; alle hi’^ w^ron for- 
sworen and here treothes forloren, for »vric rice man his castles 30 
makede and agones him heolden, and fylden pe land ful of castles. 

Hi swencten swySe pe wrecce men of pe land mid castelweorces. 

^ Slnglel, as usual. ® bebiriend. ® daer. ^ Willm, as usual. 

® k, as often. ® Stepb., as usual. ^ he. 



THE PETERBOROUGH CHRONICLE 


3 


pa pe castles waren maked, pa fylden hi mid deovles and yvele 
men. pa namen hi pa men pe hi wenden Sat ani god hefden, 
bathe be nihtes and be daeies, carlmen and wimmen, and diden 
heom in prisun efter gold and sylver, and pined heom untellendllce^ 
pining. For ne wseren navre nan martyrs swa pined alse hi w»ron ; 5 
me henged up bl the fet and smoked heom mid ful smoke ; me 
henged bl the pumbes gther bl the hffed, and hengen bryniges on 
her fet; me dide cnotted strenges abuton here h^ved and wrythen 
to Sat it g^de to pe h^rnes.**^ Hi diden heom in quarterne par 
nadres and snakes and pades w»ron inne, and drapen heom swa. 10 
Sume hi diden in crucethus, Sat is in an cseste pat was scort and 
nareu and undep, and dide scaerpe stanes perinne and prengde pe 
men perinne Sat him br^con alle pe limes. In mani of pe castles 
w®ron lof and grin, Sat w«ron rachenteges Sat twa gper thre men 
hadden onoh to baeron gnne ; pat was swa maced, Sat is faestned 15 
to an bfom, and diden an scaerp iren abuton pe ^ mannes throte 
and his hals, Sat he ne myhte ngwiderwardes, ne sitten ne lien ne 
slepen, oc baeron al Sat Iren. Mani pusend® hi drapen mid 
hunger 

I ne can ne I ne mai tellen alle pe wunder, ne alle pe pines Sat 20 
hi dideh wrecce men on pis land ; and Sat lastede pa nigentene * 
wintre wile ^j^^ephne was king, and »vre it wa^ werse and werse. 

Hi laeiden gkmes ® on the iQnes »vre um wile" and clepeden it 
tensile, pa pe wrecce men ne hadden nan mgre to gy ven, pa 
^Veden hi and brendon alle the tunes'%at, wel pp myhtes f^en'^all 25 
a daeis fare, sculdesl thu nfvre finden man in tune sittende ne land 
tiled, pa was com d^re and fifsc ® aijd c«se and butere, for nan 
ne was o pe land. Wrecce men sturven of hunger; sume ieden 
on aelmes pe wSren sum wile rice men ; sume flugen ut of lande. 
Wes nalvre g^ mare wrecceh|d onJan£,^i^ij^vre|;hft^^ 30 
werse ne diden pan hi diden^^^^J^lr^ sitMin ne forbaren hi 
nouther circe ne ^i^iaerd, oc namei^ d pe god Sat parinne was 
and brenden s^en pe cyrce and al tegaedere. Ne hi ne forbaren 

^ J>a, * J«isen. * hungjer, as often. * xix. ® gseildes. • dec, 

B 2 



4 


4 THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


biscopes ’ land, nc abbotcs ne preostes, ac riSveden munekes and 
clerkes and ^vric man other j^e pwer myhte. Gif twa men 9}>er 
tSre ^ coman rTdend to an iQn, al }?e tunscipe flugen ^ for heoni j 
wendeii c5at hf rdevfres. pe biscopes and Ifred men heom 

cursede jSvre, oc was hcom naht parof for hi weron al forcursed 5 
and forsworen and forloren. Warsae me tilede, pe erlhe ne bar nan 
corn, for pe land was al forddn mid swilce d'iedes and hi s^den 
openlice ^at Crist slep and his halechen. Swilc and mare panne 
we cunnen ssein w'e poleden ® nigentene ' wintre for ure sinnes. 

On al pis yvele time heold Martin abbot his abbotrice twentT® ic 
wintre and half gter and ehte® dseis mid micel swine, and fand pe^ 
munekes and te gestes al pat heom behoved; and heold ihycef 
carited in the bus, and popwethere wrohte on pe circe and "sette^ 
parto landes and rentes, and goded it swythe and l^t it refen, and 
brohte heom into pe newse mynstre on Sanct Petres msessed^ei mid 15 
micel w’urtscipe. Bat was anno ah mca7’naiione Domini mcxl^ a 
comhisiione loci xxiii. And he for to Rome and p^r woes w^l 
underfangen fram pe Pape Eugenie, and begaet thare privilegies, an"'^ 
of alle pe landes of pe abbotrice and anoper of pe landes pe lien 
to pe circewican ; and, gif he leng moste liven, alse he mint to don of 2^ 
pe horderwycan. And he begaet in landes pat rice men hafden mid 
strengthe : of Willelm hlalduit pe heold Rogingham pe castel, he 
wan Cotingham andjstun; and of Hugo of Waltevile he wan Hyrt- 
lingberi’^ and Stanewig and sixti’^ solid! of Aldewingle ale g^n 
And he makede manie munekes and plantede wini^rd and makede 25 
man! weorkes, and wende pe tun betere pan it woes, and woes 
god munec and god man and forpi him luveden God and gode men. 

Nu we willen soegen sum dfl wat belamp‘on Stephnes Kinges 
time. On his time pe ludeus of Norwic bohton an Cristen cild 
beforen Jlstren and pineden him alle pe ilce pining Sat ure Drihten 30 
was pined; and on lang Fridsei him on rode hengen for ure 
Drihtines luve, and sythen byiieden him. Wenden Sat it sculde 

^ h. 2 atSB, ® iii. ^ ilugaen* ® forcurssed, 

« jjolenden. xix. ® xx. ^ viii, “ >abbotrice. bze. 

^ Hyrtlingb. ^ lx. sob “ Xpisten. 



THE PETERBOROUGH CHRONICLE 


5 


ben forholen, oc ure Dryhtin atywede t 5 at he was hall martyr^; 
and ig munekes him namen and bebyrled him heglice in )?e minstre, 
and he maket J>ur ure Drihtin wunderlice and mamfi^ldllce miracles, 
and hatte he Sand Willelm. 

1138. On J)is g^r com David, King of Scotland ^ mid ormele 5 

f^rd to J>is land ; wolde winnan }?is land, and hjm cpm tdg^nes 

Willelm Eorl^gf^Albamar, )?e ]5e king hadde ^ betf ht Evorwic, and 

tg other ^vest^ men mid faeu men and fuhten wid heom, and 

flemden f)e king set te Standard and sloghen swithe micel of his 

genge. , ro 

1140. On }?isg^r wolde ]3e King Stephne taecen RodbertEorl of 

Gloucestre, j^e klnges sune Henries, ac he ne myhte for he wart it 

war. perefter in pe lengten p^strede pe sunne and te dsei abuton 

non-tid dseies pa men eten, Sat me lihtede candles 16 seten hi: and 
/<* ■* ' 
pat was oretene kalendas Apriks ^ W^ron men swythe ofwundred. 1 5 

perefter fordfeorde Willelm JErcebiscpp of Cantwarberl and te 

king makede Teodbald aercebiscop pe was abbot in the Bee, 

perefter w^x swythe inicel werre betwyx pe king and Randolf 

Eori of Casstre, noht forpl Sat he ne iaf him al Sat he cuthe axen 

him, alse he dide alle othre, oc »fre pe mare he iaf heom, pe w^serse 20 

hi w^ron him. pe eorl heold Lincol agones pe king and benam 

him al Sat he ahte to haven ; and te king for pider and besaette him 

and his brother Willelm de R[om]are in pe casteL And te «orl 

stsel ut and fercie efter Rodbert Eorl of GloucQStre and brohte him 

pider mid micel ferd; and fuhten swythe bn Candelmasse dsei 25 

agenes heore laverd and namen him — for his men him swyken and 

flugen® — and liSd him to Bristowe, and diden par in prisun and 

[fejteres. pa was al Engleland styred mar pan w’ses, and al 

yvel wses in lande. 

perefter com pe kinges dohter Henries pe hefde ben emperice in 30 
Alamanie and nu wses cuntesse in Angou, and com to Lundene 
and te Lundenissce folc hire wolde tsecen and sc» fieA and forlfs 

^ mr. * Scotl. ® adde. * ssvez. ® xiii k. April ^ Cantwarh. 

^ R. . . are ; bracketed letters or words are conjectural. ® dugaen. 



6 


/. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


fjar micel. perefter pe biscop of Wincestre, Henri pe kinges 
brother Stephnes, spac \vid Rodbert Hori and wid J>e emperice , 
and swdr heom athas Sat he nfvre ma mid te king his brother 
^volde balden, and cursede alle pe men pe mid him heolden, and 
s»de heom Sat be wolde iiven heom up Winceslre, and dide heom 5 
cumen pider, pa. hi paerinne w^ren, pa com pe kinges cwen 
mid al hke strengthe and bes^t heom, Sat per vrxs inne micel 
hunger, pa hi ne leng he muhten polen, pa stall hi ut and fiugen ; 
and hi ■\vurthen war widDten and folecheden heom and namen 
Rodbert Eorl of Gloucestre, and ledden him to Rovecestre and 10 
diden him pare in prisun ; and te emperice fleh into an minstre. 
pa feorden pe wise men betwjx pe kinges freond and te eorles 
freond, and sahtlede swa Sat me squlde leten ut pe king of prisun 
for pe eorl, and te eorl for pe king; and swa diden. 

Sithen perefter sahtleden pe king and Randolf Eorl at^Stanford, 15 
and athes sworen and treuthes faesten Sat her nouper sculde 
beswiken other. And it ne forstad naht, for pe king him sithen 
nam in Hamtun purh® wicci and dide him in prisun; and 
efsones he let him ut pprh w^rse red, to Sat forewarde Sat he 
swor on hiiiddm and gysles fand pat be alle his castles sculde iiven 20 
up. Same he iaf up and sume ne iaf he noht, and dide panne 
waerse panne he her ® sculde. 

pa was Engleland swjthe todfled. Sume helden mid te king 
and sume mid pe emperice; for pa pe king was in prisun pa 
wenden pe eories and te rice men pat he nfvre mare sculde cumen 25 
ut, and ssehtleden wyd pe emperice ^ and brohten hire into Oxen- 
foid^and Sven hire pe burch. pa pe king was ute, pa herde Sat 
saegen ^and toe his feoref and besaet hire in pe tur ; and me I^t hire 
dun on niht of pe tur mid rapes, and stal ut and sc^ fleh and i®de on 
fote to Waling^rd paerefter sc:e ferde over and hi of Normand! S® 

wendenj alle fra pe king to pe Eorl of Angseu, sume here pankes, 
and sume here unpankes ; for he bessetheom til hi a-iaven up here 
castles^ and hi nan helpe ne haefden of pe king, 

^ Jemperice, as teitaHy. *>urhci as m. next clatise aho*. * liser. 



THE PETERBOROUGH CHRONICLE 


7 


pa ferde Eustace pe Idnges sune to France and nam pe kinges 
suster of France 16 wife; wende to begseton Normandi poerpurh. 
Oc he spedde lltel, and be gode rihte for he was an yvel man, for 
warese he [com he] dide mare yvel panne god. He rfvede pe 
landes and Iseide mic[ele geldejs on ; he biohte his wif 15 Engleland 5 
and dide hire in pe caste[l on Canjteberl ^ ; god wimman scs» wses 
oc sc^ hedde litel blisse mid him. And Crist ne w'olde Sat he 
sculde lange rixan, and W3erd dfd and his moder beien. 

And te Eorl of Angseu wserd d^d and his sune Henri toe to pe 
rice. And te ewen of France tod^lde fra pe king and sc^ com to 
pe iunge Eorl Henri, and he toe hire to wive and al Peitou mid 
hire, pa ferde he mid micel f^rd into Engleland and wan castles ; 
and te king ferde agenes him mid micel mare ferd. And 
popwsethere fuhten - hi noht, oc ferden pe sercebiscop and te wise 
men betwux heom and makede Sat sahte Sat te king sculde ben 15 
laverd and king wile he livede, and sefter his dsei ware Flenrl king ; 
and he helde him for fader and he him for sune, and sib and ssehte 
sculde ben betwyx heom and on al Engleland. pis and te othre 
for\vardes pet hi makeden sworen to balden pe king and te eorl 
and te biscop and te eorles and rice men alle, pa was pe eorl 20 
underfangen aet Wincestre and ast Lundene mid micel wurtscipe, 
and alle diden him manred and sworen pe pais to halden ; and hit 
ward sone swythe god pais, swa Sat nf vre was |re pa was p? 
king strengere panne he «vert f r * was ; and te eorl ferde over s^ 
and al folc him luvede, for he dide god justise and makede pais. 25 
1154. On pis g^r wser^ pe King Stephne dfd and bebyried per 
his wif and his sune w$ron bebyried set Favresfeld ; pset minster hi 
makeden. pa pe king was dfd pa was pe eorl beionde sx, and ne 
durste nan man don oper bute god for pe micel eie of him. pa 
he to Engleland com pa was he underfangen mid micel wurtscipe, 30 
and to king bletced® in Lundene on pe Sunnendsei beforen mid- 
winter dsei, and held pjer micel curt, pat ilce dsei pat Martin, 
abbot ^ of Burch, sculde pider faren, pa s^clede he and ward dfd, 

^ teb. * fuhtten. ® here. * her, ® bleteisd. ® al5b. 



8 


/. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


fowre nmas Januarias and te munekes innen dasis cusen ojjer of 
heom s^lf, Willelm de Waltevile is gehaten, god clerc and god 
man, and luved of J^e king and of alle gode men. And o[n 
circ]en 2 byrieden }?e abbot ^ hehlice, and sonc J:e cosan abbot ^ 
ferde and te muneces [mid him to] Oxenforde to ]3e king, [and he] 5 
iaf him >at abbotrice'*. And he ferde him son[e to Lincjol and 
wses f[^^ bletced to] abbot he ham come, and [sithen] was 
underfangen [mid mic]el [wurtscipe at] Burch, mid [mice]l proces- 
siun. And swa he was alswa at Ramesaeie, and at Torneie and 
at , and Spallding®, and at S . 1. bares, and . . . , and [nu is] 10 
abbot, and fa[ire] haved begunnon. Cristus^ him un[ne god 
endinge]. 


II. THE DEDICATION TO THE ORMULUM 

Nu, bropexT Wallterr, bro)?err min affterr pe flsshess klnde, 
Annd®bro]?errnim iCrisstenndom J>urrh fulluhht anndj^urrh trow\v]?e, 
Annd broj^err ipin i Godess bus ^et® 6 pe Jpridde wise, ^ ^5 

purrh ]?att wkt'hafenn takepn^ ba an rejhellboc t 5 follahenn, 
Unnderr kanunnkess had an'^nd^ljf swa summ^annt Awwstin sette; 
Icc hafe don ^wa summ fu badd‘ annd fotf^edd ^ 

Ice hafe wennd inntill Ennglissh goddspelless h^ljne lare ’ , 

Affterr pM little witt })att me min Drihhtln hafej>|? lenedd. 20 

pu pohhtesst tatt itt mihhte wel till mikeli frame turrnenn, 
giff Ennglissh folic, forr lufe off Crist, ittVollde ^erne lernenn 
Annd folljhenn itt. annd fillenn itt yvipp )>obht, mpp word, wipp dede ; 
Annd forrpi 5errndesst tu patt icc piss werre pe shdlde wirrkenn, 
Annd icc itt hafe forpedd te, acc all purrh Cristess hellpe, 25 

Annd unne birrp bape pannkenn Crist patt itt iss brohht till ende. 

^ iiii N®. laK. ® All bracketed words are conjectural. ® patt. 

4 ab. abbrice. « Tom’. « Spall’. ^ Xpus. « % as usually. 

® $et, with double accent pride. The breve, as usual when 

in MS. lure. 



DEDICATION TO THE ORMULUM 


9 


Icc hafe sammnedd o f)iss hoc Jja goddspelless neh alle 
patt sinndenn ope messeboc inn all pe jer att messe ; 

Annd a^^ afFterr pe goddspell stannt patt tatt te goddspell mfnepp, 
patt mann birrp spellenn to pe folic off pe^jre sawle nede ; 

Annd ^et ^ t^r tekenn mare inoh pu shallt l^ronne fmdenn, 5 
Off patt tatt Cnstess hall^he ped birrp trowwenn wel annd folljhenn. 
Icc hafe sett her 0 piss b 5 c amang goddspelless wordess, 

All purrh mesellfenn, mam^ word pe rime ® swa to fillenn ; 

Acc pu shallt fmdenn patt min word, e^jwhcer p^r itt iss ekedd, 9 
Ma35 hellpenn pa patt redenn itt to sen annd t' unnderrstanndenn ® 
All pess te bettre, hu pe35m birrp pe goddspell unnderrstanndenn. 
Annd forrpi trowwe icc patt te birrp wel polenn mine wordess, 
E33wh«r p^r pu shallt findenn hemm amang goddspelless wordess ; 
For whase mot^ to l^wedd folic larspell off goddspell tellenn, 

He mot^ wel ekenn niam3 word amang goddspelless wordess. 15 
Annd icc ne mihhte nohht mm ferrs a55 wipp goddspelless wordess 
Wel fillenn all, annd all forrpi shollde icc well offte nede 
Amang goddspelless wordess don min word, min ferrs t 5 fillenn. 

Annd te bit^che icc off piss boc^ heh wikenn alls itt semepp, 

All to purrhsekenn illc an ferrs, annd to purrhlokenn offte, 20 
patt upponn all piss boc ne be nan word 3:ien Crlstess lare, 

Nan word tatt swipe wel ne be to trowwenn annd to foll5henn. 
Witt shulenn tredenn unnderr fot^ annd all pwerrtut^ forrwerrpenn 
pe ddm off all patt lape fiocc patt iss purrh nip forrblendedd, 
patt t^lepp patt to lofenn iss purrh nipfull m6dT3nesse. 25 

pe35 shulenn l^tenn ® hffipelT3 off unnkerr swinnc, lef broperr, 

Annd all pe53 shulenn takenn itt onn unnitt annd onn Idell, 

Acc nohht purrh skill, acc all purrh nip, annd all purrh pe33re 
sinne. 

Annd unnc birrp biddenn Godd tatt he forr^ife hemm here sinne ; 
Annd unnc birrp bape lofenn Godd off patt itt wass bigunnenn, 32 
Annd pannkenn Godd tatt itt iss brohht till ende purrh hiss hellpe; 

^ jet, with double accent. ^ rime. * tunnderrstanndenn. 

* vowel with double accent ® l^tenn. 



I. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


10 

Forr itt majj hellpenn alle jjatt bli)>elike itt herenn, 

Annd lufenn itt annd folljhenn itt wij>f> jsohht, vnyp word, wi)?]) 
dede. 

Annd whase %viienn shall J^iss hoc efft oj^err sij)e writenn, 

Himm bidde icc >att he’t • write- rihht, swa summ j^iss boc himm 

tScheJjjj, _ - 

All Jjwerrtut ’ affterr Jjatt itt iss uppo Jiiss firrste bisne, S 

WijpJj all swillc rime ® alls her iss sett, wijjJj all se fele wordess ; 
Annd tatt he loke wel ]3att he an bocstafF write * twijjess 
E3jwh»r JjSr itt uppo fiss boc iss writenn 6 ]?att wise. 

Lake he wel fiatt he’t* write swa, forr he ne majj. nohht elless 
Onn Ennglissh writenn ‘ rihht te word, ])att wite fie w 5 l to s6}5e. lo 
Annd jiff mann wile witenri whi icc hafe don Jjiss dede, 

■\Vhi icc till Ennglissh hafe wennd goddspelless halljhe fare, 

Icc hafe itt don forrjil fiatt all Crisstene follkess beffhless 
Iss lang uppo fiatt an, fiatt tejj goddspelless halljhe lare 
W# fulle mahhte folljhe rihht f>urrh ]?ohht, >urrh word, ]5urrh_ 

dede. _ 

Forr all fiatt Sfre onn erpe iss ned Crisstene folic to follshenn 
1 troww)>e, i dede, all tSchej?}? hemm goddspelless halljhe lare; 
Annd forrjji whase lemefi]? itt annd folljbe})^ itt wi]?]? dede. 

He shall onn ende wurrjii ben’jjurrh Godd to wurr}7enn borijheim. 
Annd tSrfore hafe icc turrnedd itt inntill Ennglisshe spSche, ao 
Forr putt I wollde blifielij Jjatt all Ennglisshe lede 
Wipp jere shollde lisstenn itt, '^.ipp herrte shollde itt trowwenn, 
Wipp tunge shollde spellenn itt, wiji}? dede sholtde|itt folljhenn. 

To winnenn unnderr CrisstenndSm att Godd sof sSwle berrhless. 
Annd jiff fejj wilenn herenn itt, annd folljhenn itt mpp dede, *5 
Icc hafe hemm hollpenn unnderr Crist to winnenn jjejjre berrhless. 
Annd I shall hafenn forr min sw’innc god laen att Godd onn Snde, 
^iff jjatt I, forr ]:e lufe off" Godd annd forr pe mede off heffne, 
Hemm hafe itt inntill Epnglissh wennd forr Jjejjre sawle nede. 

Annd jiff fiejj all foriVerfpe^ itt, itt turrne^f hemm till sinne, 30 

* het, vowel with, doohle accent. ’ wiita ’ ilme. * writenn. 



DEDICATION TO THE ORMULUM 


II 


Annd I shall hafenn addledd me pQ Laferrd Crlstess are, 
purrh patt icc hafe hemm wrohht tiss hoc to pej^re sawle nede, 
pohh patt te55 all forrwerrpenn itt purrh pe55re modi^nesse. 

Goddspell onn Enngli&sh nemmnedd iss god word, annd god 
lipennde, 

God errnde, forrpi patt itt wass purrh halljhe goddspellwrihhtess 5 
All wrohht annd writenn uppo hoc off Crlstess firrste ^ come, 

Off hu sop Godd wass wurrpenn mann forr all mannkinne nede, 
Annd off patt mannkinn purrh hiss d^p wass lesedd ut ^ off helle, 
Annd off patt he wissllke ras pe pridde da55 off d»pe, 

Annd pff^patt he wissllke stah pa sippenn upp till heffne, 10 

Annd off patt he shall cumenn efft to demenn alle pede, 

Annd forr to ^eldenn iwhillc mann affterr hiss a3henn dede. 

Off all piss god uss brinngepp word annd errnde annd god tlpennde 
Goddspell, annd forrpi majj itt wel god Srrh 3 e- 13 en ^ehatenn. 

Forr mann maj^ uppo goddspellboc godnessess findenn seffne 15 
patt ure Laferrd Jesu Crist uss hafepp don onn erpe, 
purrh patt he comm to manne annd purrh patt he warrp mann 
onn erpe. 

Forr an godnesse uss hafepp don pe Laferrd Crist onn erpe 
purrh patt he comm to wurrpenn mann forr all mannkinne nede. 
Operr godnesse uss hafepp don pe Laferrd (prist onn er}?e 20 
purrh patt he wass i flumm Jorrdan fulihtnedd"forr ure nede ; 

Forr patt he wollde uss waterrkinn till ure fulluhht halljhenn, 
purrh patt he wollde ben himmsellf onn erpe I waterr fullhtnedd. 
pe pridde god uss hafepp don pe Laferrd Crist onn erpe 
purrh patt he ^aff hiss a^henn lif wipp all hiss fulle wille 25 

To polenn d^pp o rodetre saccl^s wipputenn wrihhte, 

T 5 lesenn mannkinn purrh hiss^ d»p ut^ off pe defless walde. 
pe ferpe god uss hafepp don p? Laferrd Crist onn erpe 
purrh patt hiss hall^he sawle ^t§ii 9 a rode dun till helle, 

To t^enn ut * off hellewa pa gode sawless alle 3^^ 

^ fisste. ® vowel with double accent, ® his. * vowel with double accent. 



12 


I. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


ppit haffdenn cwemmd hitnm I ]:iss lif Jjurrh s6> unnshajjljnesse. 
pe fifte god uss hafepp don pe Laferrd Crist onn erpe 
purrh patt he ras forr Ore god pe pridde dajj olf dSpe, 

Annd let' te posstless sen himm vel inn hiss mennisske kinde; 
Forr patt he wollde fesstenn swa sop trowwpe I pejjre brestess 5 
Off patt he, wiss to fulle sop, wass risenn upp off dSpe, 

Annd I patt illke flcesh patt wass forr uss 6 rode najjledd ; 

Forr patt he wollde fesstnenn uel piss trowwpe i pejjre brestess. 
He let * te posstless sen himm wel, well offte sipe onn erpe, 
Wippinnenn dajjess fowwerrtlj fra patt he ras off d»pe. 10 

ps sexte god uss hafepp don pe Laferrd Crist onn erpe 
purrh patt he stah forr ure god upp inntill heffness blisse, 

Annd sennde sippenn Halij Cast till hise lerninngcnihhtess, 

To frofrenn*® annd to bSidenn hemm to stanndenn jSn pe defell. 
To gifenn hemm god witt inoh off all hiss hall3he lare, 15 

To gifenn hemm god lusst, god mahht, to polenn alle wawenn 
All forr pe lufe off Godd, annd nohht forr erplij loff to winnenn. 
pe sefihde god uss shall jet ’ don pe Laferrd Crist onn 5 nde 
purrh patt he shall o domess dajj uss gifenn heffness blisse, 
giff patt we shulenn wurrpi ben to findenn Godess are. 20 

puss hafepp ure Laferrd Crist uss don godnessess seffne, 
purrh patt tatt he to manne comm to ^vurrpenn mann onn erpe. 
Annd 6 patt hall^he hoc patt iss apokalypsis nemmnedd 
Uss wrat ’ te posstell Sannt Johan, purrh Halij Gastess lare, 24 
patt he sahh upp inn heffhe an boc bisett wipp seffne innsejjless, 
Annd sperrd swL swipe wel patt itt ne mihhte nan wihht oppnenn’ 
Wipputenn Godess halljhe Lamb patt he sahh ec inn heffhe. 

Annd purrh pa seffne innsejjless wass rihht swipe wel bitacnedd 
patt sefennfild godlejjc patt Crist uss dide purrh hiss come ; 29 

Annd tatt n3n wihht ne mihhte nohht oppnenn p 3 seffne innsejjless 
Wipputenn Godess Lamb, patt comm forr patt itt shoUde tacnenn 
patt nan ^vihht, nan enngell, nan mann, ne naness kinness shaffte, 

' vowel with double accent. ® froftcn. * opneun, but oppnenn 

regularly. 



DEDICATION TO THE ORMULUM 


13 


Ne mihhle J^urrh himmsellfenn pa seffne godnessess sh^wenn 
O mannkinn, s\\ a J>att it mannkinn off helle niihhte lesenn, 

Ne gifenn mannkinn lusst, ne mahht, to winnenn heffness blisse. 
Annd all all swa se Godess Lamb, all Jjurrh hiss a3henn mahhte, 
Lihhtllke mihhte annd wcl inch pa seffne innse33less oppnenn, 5 
All swa pe Laferrd Jesu Crist all ]?urrh hiss a5henn mahhte, 

WiJ?]> Faderr annd wi]:']) HalT3 Cast, an Godd annd all an klnde, 
All swa rihht he lihhtllke inoh annd wel wij>|> alle mihhte 
O mannkinn ]?urrh himmsellfenn pa seffne godnessess shsewenn, 
Swa f>att he mannkinn wel inoh off helle mihhte lesenn, 10 

Annd gifenn mannldnn lufe annd lusst, annd mahht annd witt annd 
wille, 

To stanndenn inn to cwemenn Godd to winenn heffness blisse. 
Annd forr patt halT5 goddspellboc all J^iss godnesse uss shSwe]?]?, 
piss sefennfald g6dle55c patt Crist uss dide purrh hiss are, 

Forrpi birrp all Crisstene folic goddspelles lare foll3henn. 15 

Annd tserfore hafe icc turrnedd itt inntill Ennglisshe sp^che, 

Forr patt 1 wollde blipell3 patt all Ennglisshe lede 

Wipp ^re shollde lisstenn itt, wipp herrte sholde itt trowwenn, 

Wipp tunge shollde spellenn itt, wipp dede shollde itt foll3henn, 

To winnenn unnderr crisstenndom att Crist sop sawle berrhless. 20 
Annd Godd allmahhti3 3ife uss mahht annd lusst and witt annd wille 
To foll3henn piss Ennglisshe boc patt’ all iss hali3 lare, 

Swa patt we motenn wurrpi ben to brukenn heffness blisse. 
Am[^n]. Am[^n]. Am[»n]. 

Icc patt tiss Ennglissh hafe sett, Ennglisshe menu to lare, 25 
Icc wass p^r p^r I crisstnedd wass Orrmln bi name nemmnedd ; 
Annd icc, Orrmln, full innwarrdli3 wipp mup annd ec wipp herrte 
Her bidde pa Crisstene menn patt herenn pperr redenn^ 
piss bde, hemm bidde icc her patt te53 biddenn, 

patt broperr patt tiss Ennglissh writtallre»ressl®wrat^annd wrohhte, 
patt broperr forr hiss swinne to l^n sop blisse mote f Indenn. 31 

Am[^n]. 

^ ])at. ® redenn, ® allrseresst * vowel with double accent. ^ m6te. 



E. MIDLAND OF THE THIRTEENTH AND 
FOURTEENTH CENTURIES 

I. THE BESTIARY 

The Lion’s Nature 

De leun stant on hille : and ' he man hnnten here, 

Qt 5 er ?S,urg his nfse smel smake tSat he negge, 

Bi wile weie s§ he wile to dfle nit 5 er wenden, 

AUe hise fetsteppes after him he 

Drage?S dust AVI'S his sterit Ser he dun^ steppeS, 5 

^Ser dQst §Ser deu, Sat he ne cunne is flnden; 

Drives dun to his den Sar he him bergen wille. 

An dSer kinde he haveS. Wanne he is ikindled 
Stille liS Se leun, ne stireS he nout of slepe, 

Til Se sunne haveS sinen Sries him abuten; lo 

Danne reiseS his fader him mit te rfm Sat he makeS. 

De Si^dde lage haveS Se leun; Sanne he lieS to slepeii 
Sal he nevre luken Se lides of hise egen. 

Signification 

Welle heg is tat hil Sat is hevenriche; 

Ure Lpverd is le leun Se liveS Ser abuven; 15 

Hu *'* Sg him likede to ligten her on ^erS^ 

Migte nevre divel witen, Sg he be deme hunte, 

Hu he dun come, ne hu® he dennede him 
In Sat defte meiden, Marie bi name, 

De him Bar to manne frame. 20 


■3, as usually. 


lie steppe?y. 


3 


wu. 



THE BESTIARY * 


15 


D9 ure Drigten dfd was, and dolven als§ his wille was. 

In a stQn stille he lai til it kam tSe tSridde^ dai; 

His fader him filstnede swg Sat he rgs frg dfde Sg, 
us to lif hglden. 

WakeS sg his wille is, sg Kirde for his folde; 5 

He is hirde, we ben sep; sllden he us wille 

If we heren to his word Sat we ne ggn ngwor wille. 

The Eagle’s Nature 

KiSen I wille Se frnes kmde 
Alsg ic it 0 boke rgde; 

Hu^he neweS his guShfde, 10 

M he cumeS ut of elde, 

^en hise limes arn unwejde, 

SiSen his bgc is al towrghg,' 

SiSen his fligt is al unstrgng. 

And his eg^n dimme. 15 

HereS hu ^ he neweS him ; 

A Welle he sekeS Sat springeS ai, 

BgSe bi nigt and bl dai ; 

Dergver he flegcS and up he teS 

Til Sat he Se hevene seS, ao 

Durg skies sexe and sevene. 

Til ^e cumeS to hevene. 

Sg rigt sg he cunne 
He hgveS in Se sunne; 

Be sunne swiSeS® al his fligt, 25 

And oc it makeS his egen brigt, 

Hise feSres fallen for Se hfte, 

And he dun mide to Se w|te 
FalleS in Sat wellegrund, 

Der he wurSeS* heil and sund, 30 

* wu. 


* diidde^ 


® swide?S. 


* wurdetJ* 



i6 


L THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


And cumeS ut al newe, 

Me were his bfc tintrewe. 

His bfc is get biforn ^^r9ng, 

Dog hise limes sinden^ string, 

Xe niaig he tilen him n§n fode 5 

Himself to nyiie gode. 

Danne ggS he to a stgn, 

And he bine's Seron, 

DilleS til his bfc bifQren^ 

HaveS Se wrengSe forlgren ; xo 

SiSen wiS his rigte bile 
TakeS mete Sat he wile. 

Signification 

Al is man sg is tis frn,^ wuide ge nu listen^ 

Qld in hise sinnes dei*A gr he bicumeS cristen. 14 

And tus he newcS him, Sis man, Sanne he nimeS to kirke; 
Qr he it biSenken can hise egen weren itiiike; 

ForsakeS^ Sgre Satanas and ilk sinful dede, 

TakeS him to Jesu® Crist for he sal ben his mede, 

LeveS on ure Lgverd Crist and If reS prestes Igre ; 

Of hise egen wfreS Se mist wiles he dreccheS Sgre. 20 

His hgpe is al to Gode ward, and of his luve he leteS 

Dat is te sunne sikerlike, Sus his sigte he beteS; 

Naked falleS in Se funtfat, and cumeS ut al newe, 

Buten a lltel ; wat is tat ? his muS is get untrewe ; 

His muS is get wel unkuS wiS paternoster and crede. 25 

Fare he norS or fare he suS, Ifren he sal his nede ; 

Bidden bone to Gode and tus his muS rigten, 

Tilen him sg Se sowles f 5 de Surg grace off ure Drigtin. 

^ senden. * bifom, * listlen, * forsaket. * ihu. 

® lere’S. ^ er. 



THE BESTIARY 


^7 


The Serpents Nature 

An 'svirm is 5 wcrlde wel man it knowet?, 

Neddre is te name ; Sus he him newetS 

Danne he is forbrgken \ and in his elde al forbroiden 

Fasted til his fel him slaketS ten daies fulle, 

£>at he is Ifne and mainlfs and ivele mai gangen ; 5 

He crepe^ cripelande for^, his craft he ^us kl^etS, 

Seke^ a sign tSat a tSirl is on, narwe buten he nedetJ him, 

Nime^ unnfSes Surg, for his fel he Ser lete^. 

His flfs forts crepetS, ^ walketS t5 tSe water ward, 

Wile ^anne drinken. (5c be spewetS gr al 0e venim 10 

Dat in his brest is bred frp his birde time ; 

DrinkeS si'Sen inog, and tus he him newe^. 

Danne tSe neddre is of his hid naked 
And bare of his brestatter, 

If he naked man se ne wile he him nogt neggen, 1 5 

Oc he fletS fr§ him als he frg fir sulde. 

If he clQtSed man se cgf he waxetS, 

For up he rigtetS him rf dl to dfren, 

T o df ren er to df d maken, if he it mugc fortSen. 

Wat if tSe man war "wuitSe and wfren him cunne, 20 

Figte'S wi'S "Sis wirm and laretS on him figtande ? 

Dis neddre sitSen he nede sal 

LlaketS seld of his bodi and sildetS his hfved ; 

Litel him is of hise limes, bute he lif h^lde. 

Signification 

Know Cristene man wat tu Crist higtest, 25 

Atte kirkedure tSar tSd ciistned were. 

Du higtes^td leven on him, and hise lages luvien, 

To helden wit herte tSe bpdes of hgli kirke \ 

^ forbroken and forbroiden. ® forwurden. ^ fretJ. * krke. 

C 



/. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


l8 

If Su havest is brgken, al "Su forbredes ^ 

FonvurSes and forgelwes eche llf t 5 i^glden; 
iJlded art frg eche blis s§ "Sis wirm o werld is, 

Newe Se for¥i- sg Se neddre do^, 

It is le ned. 5 

Feste Se of stfdefastnesse, and ful of 'Sewcs, 

And help Se povre men Se gangen abuten. 

Ne deme Se nogt wur’Si ® tSat tu dure loken 
Up to Sc hevcne ward ; oc walke wiS Se crSe, 

!Mildelike among men. Ng mod Su ne cune, lo 

Mod ne mannes uncost; oc swic of sineginge. 

And bote bid tu Se ai, bgSe bl nigt and bi dai, 

Dat tu milce mote haven of Sine misdedes. 

DIs lif bitgkneS Se sti Sat le neddre gangeS bi, 

And tis is Se Sirl of Se sign Sat tu salt Surg ggn : 15 

Let Sin fil'Se frg Se sg Se wirm his fel doS; 

Gg Su San to Codes hus Se godspel t 5 heren, 

Dat is soule drink, sinnes quenching. 

Oc gr sei Su in sciifte to Se prest sinnes tine, 

Feg Se Sus of Si brestfilSe ^ and feste Se forSward 2a 

Fast at tin herte Sat tu firmest higtes. 

Dus art tu ging and newe, forSward be Su tre\ve. 

NedeS Se Se devel nogt, for he ne mai Se df ren nogt ; 

Oc he fleS frg Se sg neddre frg Se nakede. 

On Se clgSede Se neddre is cgf, and te devel diver on sinnes; 25 
Ai Se sinfule bisetten he wile, 

And wiS al mankin he haveS niS and win, 

Wat if he Ifve have of ure Hevenlgverd 
For to dfren us sg he ure eldere gr dede ? 

Do we Se bodi in Se bale and bergen Se soulc, 30 

Dat is ure hfved gevelic, helde we it wurSlic. 


1 forbretJes. 


2 fordi* 


^ nogwurdi. 


^ filde. 



THE BESTIARY 


19 


The Whale’s Nature 

Ceihegrande is a fis 
De mgste cSat in water is; 

Dat tu wuldes seien get, 

Gef Su it S9ge wan it flet, 

Dat it were an eilpnd ^ 5 

Dat sete on® ^e sfsgnd. 

Dis fis tSat is unrIde, 

Danne him hungre '5 he gapet? wide; 

Ut of his Srpte it smit an gnde, 

De s%vetteste ^ing tSat is o ignde. 10 

Derfgre otSre fisses to him dragen, 

Wan he it felen he aren fagen; 

He cumen and hpven in his muS, 

Of his swike he am uncuS. 

Dis cete Sanne hise chaveles lukeS, 15 

Dise fisses alle in sukeS ; 

De smale he wile tSus biswiken, 

De grfte maig he nogt bigripen. 

Dis fis wunet 5 witS tSe sfgrund. 

And live‘S tSer evre heil and sund, 20 

Til it cume'S tSe time 
Dat storm stirecS al tSe sf, 

Danne sumer and winter winnen. 

Ne mai it wunen tJerinne, 

Sq drovi is te sfes grund, 25 

Ne mai he wunen tSer Sat stund, 

Oc stiretS up and hpvetS stille. 

Wiles Sat® weder is sg ille, 

De sipes Sat am on sf fordriven, — 

LgS hem is dftS**, and lef to liven, — 30 

3 one. ® Sar. * ded. 


^ aneUond. 


C 2 



20 


/. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


Biloken hem and sen Sis fis, 

An eilQud be wenen it is. 

Derof he aren swiSe fagen, 

And mid here migt Sarto he dragen 

Sipes on festen, 5 

And alle up gangen. 

Of stpn mid stel in Se tunder 
Wa to brennen on^ Sis wunder, 

Warmen hem wa and ften^ and drinken. 

De fir he feleS and doS hem sinken, lo 

For sone he diveS dun to grunde ; 

He drfpeS hem alle wiSuten wunde. 

SlONIFICATION 

Dis devel is mikel wiS wil and magt, 

Sg wicches haven in here craft* 

He doS men hungren and h?lven Srist, 15 

And man! oSer sinful list, 

TolIeS men to him wiS his gnde, 

Wosg him folegeS he findeS sgnde. 

Dg arn Se little in leve lage, 

De mikle ne maig he to him dragen; 20 

De mikle, I mfne Se stgdefast 
In rigte Ifve mid flfs and gast. 

Wosg listneS develes Igre, 

On lengSe it sal him rewen sgre ; 

Wosg festeS hgpe on him, 25 

He sal him folgen to helle dim. 


^ one. 


^ heten. 



THE STORY OF JOSEPH 


21 


* wiwes. 


11. THE STORY OF JOSEPH 

PuTiFAR trewiS hise wives ^ tale, 

And hav^S^jdempt losep to bale; 

He bad ben sperd faste^ dun. 

And hglden harde in prisun. 

An litel stund quile he \vas Ser, 

Sg gaii him luven tSe. prisuner, ^ 

And him Se* cliartfe haveS bita^ 

Wib bp prisunes to liven in agt^ 

Or for misdede, or for onsagen, 

Dgr wpren to Sat prisun dragen 
Qn Sat Se kinges kuppe bfd, 

And gn Se made Se kinges brgd. 

Hem drempte drfmes bgSen d nigt. 

And he wurSen swiSe sgre ofrigt. 

Joseph hem servede Sgr on sel 
At here drink and at here mel; 

He herde hem murnen, he® freinde forquat; 
Harde dr|mes §gen awgld Sat. 

Dg seide he to Se buteler^, 

‘Tel me Sin drgm, mi broSer der®; 
QueSersg it wurSe softe or strgng, 

De reching wurS on God bilgng/ 

‘Me drempte ic stod at a wintre 
Dat hadde ® waxen buges Sre ; 

Qrest it blomede, and siSen bar 
Be berles ripe, wurS ic war. 

Be kinges kuppe ic^® hadde on hgnd; 

Be beries Sgrinne me Sugte ic wrgng, 

® haved. ® fast. * de. ® hagt * 
^ butuler. ® her. * adde. kinges ic. 


lo 


15 


20 


25 


he hem 



22 


7 . THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


And bar it drinken to Pharaon, 

Me drempte, als ic was wune to don/ 

‘ Good is/ quatS Joseph, ‘ to dremen of win, 
Heilnesse and blisse is Serin; 

Dre daies ben get for to cumen, 5 

Du salt ben ut of prisun numen, 

And on Sin ofiis^ set agen. 

Of me Su Senke- San it sal ben; 

Bed min ernde® to Pharaon, 

Dat* ic ut of prisun wurSe don; lo 

For ic am stglen of kinde Ignd, 

And wrigtelf slike ® hplden in bpnd/ 

QuaS Sis brf dwrigte, ‘ LiSeS nu me : 

Me drempte ic bar brfadlfpes Sre, 

And Sgrin br|ad and oSer mften 15 

Quilke ben ^vune Se kinges to ften; 

And fugeles haven Sgron lagt, 

Dgrfgre ic am in sorge and agt®, 

For ic ne migte me nogt wfren, 

Ne Sat mfte frg hem bfren/ 20 

* Me wgre- levere,’ quad Joseph, ^ 

'Of fddi drfmes rechen swep; 

Du salt, after Se Sridde dei, 

Ben do on rode," weilawei I 

And fugeles sulen Si fieis totfren, 25 

Dat sal ngn agte mugen Se wgren/ 

SoS wurS sg Joseph seide Sat, 

DIs buteler Joseph sone forgat; 

Two ger siSen was Joseph sperd, 

Dgr in prisun wiSuten frd. “ 30 

Dg drempte Pharaon king a drfm 
Dat he stod bl Se fiodes strfm, 

^ oflfiz, 2 25h€nke. ® herdne. * tJa. ® her wrigteleslike, 

® hagt 



THE STORY OF JOSEPH 


^3 


^ tJeden. 
® raoclie. 
hogt. 


And ^e'Sen ^ utcomen sevene ^ n^^t, 
Everilc wel swl^e ff t and grf t ; 

And sevene Ifne after ^9, 

De deden 6e sevene fette ^\g. - 
De Igne haven Ze fette freten; 

Bis drfm ne mai tSe king forgeten. 

An d'Ser drfm cam him bifpren: 

Sevene fres^ wexen fette of corn^, 

On an busk ranc and wel tidi, 

And sevene Ifne rigt S§ibT, 

Welkede and smale and drugte numen, 
Be ranpe ® haven Zg gvercumen ; 
Tdsalnen it smiten and on a stund 
De fette ?SrIsten to 6e® grund. 

De king abraid and woe in Zogt'^, 

Des drfmes swep ne wpt he nogt; 

Ne was ngn sg \^ise* in al his l§nd 
De kude undon Zis drfmes bfnd. 

Bg him bitSogte*’ Sat buteler 
Of Sat him drempte in prisun Ser, 

And of loseph in Se prisun, 

And he it tgide Se king Pharaun. 
loseph was sone in prisun Sf sogt^®. 
And shaven and clad and to him brogt. 
De king him bad ben hard! and bgld. 

If he can rechen Sis drfmes wgld; 

He igld him quat him drempte o nigt, 
And losep rechede his drfm wel rigt. 

*Dis two drfmes bgSen ben gn, 

God wile Se tawnen, King Pharaon. 

Df sevene ger ben get to cumen^ 

In al fulsumhfd sulen it ben numen, 

® vii, as throughout this passage. ’ eares. 
* ?yrjst hem to So. tJhogt, * so wis man, 
vii, as usual. 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


* coren, 
hi’eShogte, 



24 


/. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


And seven e o’Sere sulen after ben, 

S9ri and nedful men sulen is sen, 

A 1 8at ? 5 ise firste^ sevene maken 
Sulen tSis o'Sere sevene rospen and raken. 

Ic rede ?Se, King, nu her bifgren, 5 

To maken latSes and gaderen corn 
Dat tSin folc ne wurS undernumen 
Quan hungri gere ben forScumen/ 

King Pharaon listnede hise red, 

Dat wurS him siSen seli sped, 10 

He bitagte losep his ring, 

And his bege of gold for wurSing, 

And bad him al his Ipnd bisen, 

And under him hegest for to ben; 

And bad him welden in his hgnd 15 

His folc, and ‘'agte, and al his l§nd. 

Bg was under hina Sanne Putifar, 

And his wif "Sat hem so tobar. 

Joseph to wive his dowter nam, — 

O'Ser is nii t?an^ bicam; 20 

And ghe Ser him two childer bar, 

Qr men wurtS of t 5 at hunger war. 

First Manassen and Effraym ; 

Pie luveden God, he gfld it hem. 

Dc sevene fulsum geres faren, 25 

losep cu( 5 e him bif^ren waren; 

Dan com^ wantede in o^er Ignd, 

Dp was ynug® under his hpnd. 

Hunger wex in Ipnd Chanaan, 

And his lene® sunes lacob for? 5 an 30 

Sente int 5 Egipt to bringen corn®; 

He bilff at hpm was gungest bpren. 



^ Hrst. 


coren. 


® <juan. 


* ear. 


® fS'o ynug. 



THE STORY OF JOSEPH 


25 


De tene^ comen, for nede sogt, 

To losep, and he ne knewen him nogt. 

And he lutlen him frigtilike, 

And seiden to him mildelike, 

‘ We ben sgndes, for nede driven 5 

To bigen corn tSgrbi to liven/ 
losep hem knew al in his ^ogt®, 

Als he let he knew hem nogt. 

‘It Seme'S^ wel Sat ge spies ben, 

And into Sis Ignd cumen to sen; 10 

And cume ge for ngn oSer Sing 
But for to spien ur Igrd Se king/ 

‘ Nai,' he seiden everilc gn, 

‘ Spies were we never ngn, 

Oc alle we ben gn faderes sunen; 15 

For hunger doS us® hider cumen/ 

‘Oc nu ic wgt ge spies ben, 

For bl gure bering men mai it sen. 

Hu sulde gn man® povre forgeten, 

Swilke and sg manige sunes bigeten? 20 

For seldum bitid self ani king 
Swilc men to sen of hise ofspring.’ 

‘A, Igverd, merci, get is Sgr gn, 

Migt he nogt frg his fader ggn. 

He is gungest, hgten Beniamin, 25 

For we ben alle of Ebrisse kin/ 

‘Nu, bz Se feiS ic gg to King Pharaon, 

Sale ge nogt alle hlSen"^ ggn 
Til ge me bringen Beniamin, 

De® gungeste broSer of gure® kin/ 30 

For Sg was losep sgre fordred 
Dat he wgre oc Surg’® hem forred. 

s. ^ * ?Jliogt. * semet. ® dotS^s. ® kusuld said oninan. 

’ e?ien. ® Sa. ® pore. tflmrg. 



26 


/. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


^ fJeden. 


He dede hem binden, and Ifden dun 
And spfren faste in his prisun; 

De tSridde dai he let hem gpn, 

A1 but t5e tgn bro'Ser Symeon; 

Dis Symeon bilff tSgr in bgnd 
To wdde under losepes hgnd. 

Des oSere breSere sone ongn 
Token Ifve and wenten hgm. 

And sone he weren tJf^en ^ went, 
Wcl sgre be haven hem biment, . 
And seiden hem t5an 6gr bitwen, 
‘Wrigtful we in sorwe ben, 

For we sinlgeden quilum gr 
On ure^ brother michil mgr 
For we werneden him merd, 

Nu drege we sorge al fortSi/ 

Wende here ngn it on his mod, 

Oc losep al it understod. 

losepes men ^gr qulles deden 
Al sg losep hem hadde* beden; 

Dg breSere seckes haven he filt, 

And in everilc fSe silver pilt 
Dat Sdr was paied^ for Se com®. 
And bunden Se mutJes ^gr bifgren. 
Oc t?e breSere ne wisten it nogt, 

Hu tSis dede wurSe wrogt ; 

Oc alle he weren gverSogt, 

And haven it sg to lacob brogt, 

And tgiden him sg of here sped; 

And al he it listnede in frigtihfd, 
Quan men* Sg seckes Sgr unbgnd. 
And in egrn* Sg agtes fgnd, 

* hurei ® adde. * paid, 

• and quan. 


30 


15 


20 


25 


30 


® coreur 



THE STORY OF JOSEPH 


27 


Alle he wgren ^anne sgre^ ofrigt. 
lacob tSus him bimfneS origt, 

‘Wei michel sorge is me bicumen, 

Dat min two childre aren me fornumeh. 

Gf losep wgt ic ending ngn, 5 

And bgndes ben leid on Symeon; 

If ge Beniamin frg me don, 

DfatS® and sorge me sggetS on.. 

Ai sal Beniamin wi ?5 me bil^veh ® 

Bgr qmles ic sal on werlde liven.' 10 

quaS ludas, ^Us sal ben hard, 

If we ng hglden him non forward.' 

Wex dertSe, tSis corn^ is ggn, 
lacob eft bit hem iaren aggn ; 

Oc he ne duren weie cumen in, 15 

‘ But ge wits us senden Beniamin.' 

Dg quaS he, ‘Quan it is ned,'**-' '^' 

And ic® ne can ng bettre red, 

Bfre'S Sal ® silver hgl aggn 

Dat hem Sgrof ne wante ngn, ^ 20 

And dSer silver Sgr bifgren""* 

For to bigen wiS oSer corn*; 

Fruit and spices of dere pris 
BfreS Sat man Sat is sg wis. 

God unne’' him fSemoded® ben, . 25 

And sende me min childre agen.' 

Dg namen he forSw^eie rigt, 

Til he ben into® Egypte ligt. 

And quanne losep hem alie sag 

Kinde Sogt in his herte lag^®. 30 

He bad his stiward gerken his^^ mften, 

He seide he sulden wiS him |ten^®. 

^ ?5anno sori. ® dead. ® bilewen. * derke tJis coren. ® no ic 
in MS, ^ dat. ^ hunne. ® eSimodes. ® ben cumen into. tShogt 
. . , was, is. alle eten. 



28 


7 . THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


He ledde hem alle to losepes bin, 

Her ngn hadden Sq Igten mirl. 

‘LQverd/ he seiden Sp everilc pn, 

‘ Gur silver is gu brogt agpn ; 

It was in ure seckes don, 5 

Ne wiste ure' ngn gilt Spron/ 

‘Bets nu stille/ quad Se stiward,® 

‘For ic nu have mm forward/ .. 

Dgr cam Sat broSer Symeon 
And kiste his breSere gn and gn; 10 

Wei fagen he was of here come, 

For he was numen Sgr to ngme. 

It was undren time or mgre, 

Hgm®* cam Sat riche Igverd Sgre; 

And al Sg breSere® of frigti mod, 15 

’Fellen biforn Sat Igverdes^ fot, 

And bedden him riche present 
Dat here fader him hadde® sent. 

And he levelike it understod, 

For alle he weren of kinde blod. 20 

‘LiveS,' quad he, ‘Sat fader get 
Dat Sus manige sunes bigat?' 

‘ Lgverd/ he seiden, ‘ get he liveS,^ — 

Wgt ic Sgr ngn Sat he ne biveS, — 

‘And Sis is gunge Beniamin 25 

Hider brogt after bgdeword Sin/ 

Dg losep sag him Sgr bifgren, 

Bi fader and moder broSer bgren, 

Him gverwente his herte ongn; 

Kinde luve gan him gverggn. 30 

Sone he gede ut and stille he gret, 

Dat al his wlite wurS tgres wet. 


^ ur. 


2 quad stlward. 2 a 


^ britoe, * louerdis, ^ Hi adde. 



THE STORY OF JOSEPH 


29 


After Sat gr§t he weis his^ wiiten. 

And cam San in and bad hem ften. 

He dede hem wassen, and him bif^ren 
Sette^ hem as he weren b^ren; 

Get he Sogte ® of his faderes wunes, 5 

Hu he sette at Se mfte hise sunes. 

Of everilc sgnde, of everilc win, 

M§st and best he gaf Beniamin. 

In fulsumhfd he wurSen glaSe, 

losep ne Soht Sgrof n§ scaSe, 10 

Oc it him likede swiSe 'sveL 

And hem l|rede and tagte wel, 

And hu he sulden hem best Ifden 
Quane he c 5 men in unkinde Seden ; 

^And al Se bettre sule ge speden, 15 

If ge wilen gu wiS trewSe^ If den.’ 

Eft on morwen quan it was dai, 

Or §r Se breSere ferden awai, 

Here seckes wgren alle filt wiS corn-*^, 

And Se silver Sgrin bifgren; 20 

And Se seek Sat agte Beniamin 
losepes cuppe hid was Sgrin. 

And quan he weren Qt tiine went, 

Idsep haveS hem after sent. 

Dis sgnde hem gvertakeS raSe, 25 

And bicalleS of harme and sc^Se; 

^ Unseli men, quat have ge don ? 

Grft unselhSe® is gu cumen on, 

For is it nogt min Igrd forhglen 
Dat^ gure gn haveS his^ cuppe stglen.* 30 

Dg® seiden Se breSere sikerlike, 

‘ Up quam Su it findes witterlike, 

is, ® and sette. ® tShogte. * treweit>e. * 

’ ?ya. « S. 


coren. 


® tinsel2Jehe. 





/. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


He be slagen^ and we agen driven 
Into 'Sralclom, evermgr to liven/ 

He gan hem ransakcn gn and gn, 

And fgnd it '^gr sone angn; 

And nam Zg bre^ere everilk gn ^ 5 

And ledde hem sorful aggn. 

And brogte hem bifgr losep 

WiS reweli Igte, and sorwe and wep. 

Dg quat losep, ‘Ne wiste ge nogt 
Bat ic am o wel ^ witter Sogt ? 10 

Mai nogt Ignge me ben forhglen 
Quatsgevere on Ignde wur^ stglen/ 

^ Lgverd/ quad ludas, ^ do wiS me 
Quatsg Si wille on werlde be, 

WiSSan Sat Su friSe Beniamin. 15 

Ic ledde him ut* on Irewthe min 
Dat he sulde eft** cumen agen 
T 5 hise fader, and wiS him ben.' 

Dg cam losep swilc rewSe upon, 

He dede alle® ut Se toSere ggn; 20 

And spac unfSes, sg he® gret, 

Dat alle hise wlite w’urS tfres wet. 

^Ic am losep, dredeS gu nogt, 

For gure helSe gr hider brogt. 

Tvvo'^ ger ben nu Sat derSe ® is cumen, 25 

Get sulen five® fulle ben numen, 

Dat men ne sulen sowen ne shfren, 

Sg sal drugte Se feldes dfren. 

RapeS gu to min fader agen. 

And seiS him quilke min blisses ben; 30 

And doS him to me cumen hider, 

And ge and gure orf al togider. 

^ he slagen. ^ wol. * ledde ut. * ef. ® halle. ® e. 

^ to. ® derke. ® v. 



THE STORy OF JOSEPH 


Of lewse god in l§nd Gersen 
Sulen ge sundii riche ben/ 

Everilc he kiste, on ilc he gret, 
lie here was of his"^ tfres wet. 

Sone it was King Pharaon kid 
Hu Sis newe tiSing wurS bitid; 

And he was bliSe, in herte fagen, 

Dat losep wulde him Sider dragen, 

For luve of losep migte he timen. 

He bad cartes and waines nimen. 

And fechen wives and childre and men, 
And gaf hem Spr al Ipnd Gersen, 

And het hem Sat he sulden haven 
Mgre and bet San he kude craven, 
losep gaf ilc here Iwinne srud, 

Beniamin mpst he made prud ; 

Fif weden best bar Beniamin, 

Dre hundred plates of silver fin. 

AIsq f|le oSre Sgrtil 

He bad ben in his faderes will; 

And tene® asses wiS sfmes fest. 

Of alle Egyptes welSe® best, 

Gaf he his breSere wiS herte bliSe, 

And bad hem rapen hem h9m\vard swiSe 
And he sq deden wdS herte fagen; 
Tow'ard here fader he gnnen dragen, 

And quane he c5men him bifpren 
Ne wdste he nogt quat he wpren. 

‘ LQverd/ he seiden, ' Israel, 
losep Sin sune greteS Se wel. 

And sendeS Se bgde Sat he liveth; 

Al Egipte in his wiUe * cliveS/ 

^ is, as often. * x. ® wel2Jhe. * wil. 



32 


7. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


lacob abraid, and trewe^^ it nogt 
Til he sag al Sat welSe brogt. 

'Wei me/ quaS he, '\^el is me wel 
Dat ic have^ abiden Sus swilc^ sel. 
And ic sal to min sune fare, 

And sen gr ic of werlde chare/ 
Jacob ^ wente ut of Ignd Chanaan, 
And of his kmde wel manie a man. 
losep wel faire him understod, 

And Pharaon Sogte it ful good; 

For Sat he weren hirdemen 
lie bad hem ben in Ignd Gersen. 

Jacob was brogt bifgren Se king 
For to geven him his blissing®. 
'Fader dereV qtiaS Pharaon, 

'Hu f|Ie ger be Se on?’ 

‘An hundred ger and Srittl'^ mg 
Have ic her drogen in werlde wg ; 
Dog SinkeS me Sgroffen fg 
Dg® ic is have drogen in wg, 

SiSen ic gan on werlde ben, 

Jier uten grcl, mankin bitwen.' 

Sg SinkeS® everilc wlse^® man 
De wgt qugrof mankin bigan. 

And Se of Adames gilte muneS, 

Dat he her uten grdes^^ wuneS. 

Pharaon bad him wurSen wel 
Jn Eofte reste and sell mel; 

Him and hise sunes in reste dede 
Jn Ignd Gersen on sundri stgde. 
SiSen Sgr was mad gn site^^ 

De was ihgten’® Ramese 


5 


lO 


15 


20 


25 


30 


1 trewed. ® ave. ® swil. ^ acoh. ® bliscing. ® derer. 
^ XXX. ® tJog. ® ^Jinked, wis. herdes. “ scite. yeten. 



THE STORY OF JOSEPH 


33 


lacob on live wunede t^er^ 

In reste fulle fowrtene® ger; 

And God him let bilgren sen 
Quilc lime hise ending snide ben. 

He bad losep his leve sune 5 

Qn ^ing^ tSat off he* wel milne, 

Dat quan it wurtSe® mid him don, 

He snide him birlen in Ebron ; 

And witterllke he it havetS® him seid 

De stfde ^gr Abraham was leid. lo 

S§ was him lef^ to wur^en leid 

Qu§r Hall ® Cast stille hadde seid 

Him and hise eldere fer |r® bifgren, 

Qugr Jesu Crist wulde ben bgren, 

And qugr ben dfad, and qugr ben graven; 15 
He Sogt wi’S hem reste to haven. 

losep swor him al sg he bad. 

And he Sgrof wur^ bliSe and glad. 

Qr San he waste off werlde faren, 

He bad hise klnde to him charen, 20 

And seide quat of hem snide ben; 

Hall Cast dede it him seen. 

In clfne ending and hall® lif, 

Sg he forl^ ?Sis werldes jtrif. 

losep dede hise ll^' faire gf ren, 25 

Wassen, and richelike smfren, 

And spicelike swete smaken; 

And Egipte folc him biwaken 
Fgw^^tH^ nigtes and fowerl^ daiges; 

Swilce wgren Egipte laige^®. 30 

First nigen^* nigt llches b|^en, 

* <Jor. ^ adiij. ® tJhing. * offe. ® wuxfS, ® ave??, 

^ Hf. ® all. ® ear. osep, xl. swilc. lages, 

ix. 

D 



34 


7 . THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


And smfren, and winden and biqu§Sen. 

And ^v^Lken is si^en fowertC^ 

Be men sg deden hadden® migtj 
And Ebrisse folc hadden^ an kire, 

Nogt sone delven it jre, 5 

Oc wassen it and kepen it rigt, 

WitSuten smerles sevene nigt, 

And siSen® smfred Srittl^ daiges. 

Cristene folc have® otSer laiges ; 

He ben smfred Spr quiles he liven, lo 

WiS crisnie and olie, in trewSe given®; 

For trewtJe and gode dedes mide 
Don® ben San al Sat wechdede. 

Sum pn, sum Sre, sum sevene"^ nigt, 

Sum SrittT^, sum twelve® moneS rigt, 15 

And sum everilc wurSen ger, 

Bgr quiles Sat he wunen her, 

Don for Se dede chircheggng, 

Elmessegifte, and messespng, 

And Sat is on Se weches stfde; 20 

Wei him mai ben Sat® wel it dede. 

Egipte folc haveS^® him waked 
Fowerti^ nigt and ffste maked, 

And hise sunes SrittI daiges, 

In clfne lif and h|lH^ laiges. 25 

Sq wpren forS ten^® wukes gqn, 

Get hadde^® lacob birigeles npn. 

And Pharaon King cam bgde bifpren, 

Bat losep hSveS his fader swpren. 



And he it him gatte Spr he 

wel dede, 



And bad him nimen him feres mide, 


‘ xl. ^ 

^ adden, ^ siden. 

* XXX. 

® geven. 

® ?ion. 

^ vii. ® xii. ® dat. 

avety. 

all. 


X. ^ adde. 



FLORIS AND 'BLAUNCHEFLUR 


35 


Wei wgpnede men and wis of hfre, 

Dat ^ ng man hem bl weie df re 
Dat here is led, ^is folc is rad, 

He foren abuten bi Adad. 

Ful sevene nigt he "Ser abiden, £ 

And bim^ning for Iac5b deden. 

Sq Ignge he haven tSe^en numen, 

To flum Jurdan tSat he ben cumen, 

And 9 ver P ha ran lil Ebron; 

Dgr is tSat liche in birlele d5n. lo 

And losep into Egipte went 
Wi^ al his folc ut witS him sent®. 


HI. FLORIS AND BLAUNCHEFLUR. 

pE porter po^te what to rede ; , , 

He let fiures gadere on pe mede, 

Cupen he let fille'^ of flures 15 

To strawen in pe maidenes bures. 
pat was his red to helpe him sp, 

He let Flpris ® on pat gn cupe gg, 

Tweie® gegges pe cupe here, 

And for hfvie wrpp hi were ; io 

Hi beden God jive him yveU fin 
pat sg manie flures dide® perin. 

To pe chaumbre per hi scholde g§ 

Ne jeden hi arijt ng ; 

To anoper chaumbre hi ben ® aggn, 25 

To Blauncheflures chaumbre npn. 
pe cQpe hi sette to pe grunde, 

And g§n^® forp and lete^^ hire stunde’*. 

^ dat. ® deren. ® wid al . . . snt, * fulle. * Floriz, as often. 
* twcL ^ vud. ® dude, as often. ® beo]?. gob as often, 

lete*. “ stonde. 


X) 2 



36 


7. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


Q maiden com and wolde 
J?e flures handlen and bihgide; 

Flgris -wende hit were his swete wi^t, 

Ut of Jdc cupe l;e lep ari3t, 

And })at maide for J)e drede 5 

Bigan lo crie and to grede. 
pg niste' Flgrls what 15 rfde 
For pe ferhch pat he hadde; 

Into pe cupe he sterte a^e ® 

And wip pe flures hidde he^ lo 

pis maide po5te angn ri^t 

pat hit was Flgris, pat swete wi5t, 

For here chaumbres ni^e* were, 

Selde was pat hi togadere nere, 

And ofte Blauncheflur hire hadde itgld 15 

Hu heo was fram him isgld. 

Nu maidenes comen in to hire Ifpe, 

Wei fiftene in gn hfpc. 

And axede hire w^hat hire w'ere, 

And whi heo makede suche here. 20 

Wei heo was bipo^t and whare 
To finden hem answare : 

‘To pe cupe/ heo sfde, ‘ich® com and wolde 
pis flures handlen and bihglde; 
per fli^te ® ut a buterfll3e, 25 

Are ich wiste on min I^e, 

Sg sgre ich w^as oflerd of pan 
pat ich lude" crie bigan.’ 
pis opere lojen and hadde gleo, 

And ggn a3en and leten® beo, 30 

Clarice hatte pat maide hende; 

To Blauncheflur heo® gan wende 

^ nuste. ^ aje, from MS. A, ® he hndde him. * nij* ® ihc, and 
always. ® fliste. ’’ lude, not in MS. ® letep. ® blatincheflures chaumbre heo. 



FLORIS AND BLAUNCHEFLUR 


37 


And sf de, ‘ Swete Blauncheflur, 

Wilt u seo a wel fair flur? 

Hit ne grew no^t on ]>is Ignde, 
pat flur pat ich bringe pe to hgnde/ 

‘Away, Claris quap Blauncheflur, 5 

‘Ho pat luvep paramur, 

And hap perof joye mai luve flures; 

Ac ich libbe in sore^e in pis tures, 

For ich wene, wipute^ gabbe, 

pat pe Admiral me wile^ habbe. 10 

Ac pilke day ne schal nevre be, 

Ne schal me nevere atwite me 
pat ich beo of luve untrewe, 

Ne chaunge luve for ng newe, 

Ne lete pe glde for ng newe be, 15 

Sg dop Tigris on his contre ; 

Ac pej Flgris for3ete^ me, 

Ne schal ich nevre for^ete pe/ 

Claris iherde pes ille reupe 
Of trewnesse and of trewpe; 20 

pe tf res ® glide of hire lere : 

‘Blauncheflur,’ he sfde, ‘gode ifere, 

Leve swete Blauncheflur, 

Cum and se a wel fair flur/ 

Togedere hi ggn nu iwis, 25 

And Tigris hap iherd al pis; 

Ut of pe cupe he lep angn, 

And to Blauncheflur he gan ggn. 

Eiper oper gone ikneu, 

Bgpe nupe hi chaungen® heu; 30 

Togadere wipute word hi lepen, 

Klepte and kiste and eke wepen ® ; 

^ Clariz, occasionally. ^ bijjute, as often. ® wule, as occasionalb\ 

* forse. * tieres. ® chatingej). keste. * weopen. 



38 

/. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 

Here kissingc^ ilfste a milcj 

And ] 7 at hem J^u^te litel while. 

p9® Clarice biheld® al )?is, 

Here cuntenaimce and here blis; 



Seide Clarice to Blauncheflur, 
'Knowest u 03t ^ete pis flur? 

A litel fr pu noldest hit se, 

Nu ne mi^te hit lete fram pe. 

He moste kunne micheP of art 

S 


pat pu woldest ^eve perof part/ 

‘ Certes/ quap Blauncheflur to Claris, 
‘pis is min pjene swete Flpris.’ 

Nu bppe two pes swete pinge® 
Crie^ hire merci al wepinge, 

10 


To pe Admiral pat hem ne wreie 

For penne were here sore^e neie®. 
Clarice hadde of hem pii 5 : 

‘Ngping/ heo sfde, ‘ne dute ^e, 

Ne dute ^e nampre * -wipalle 

15 


pat hit were to me bifalle. 

Hfle ich wille and npping wreie 

Ower beire cumpaignie.' 

Clarice hem hap to bedde ibrojt 
pat was of pal and selc iwro^t ; 

20 


In bedde heo bro^te hem adun, 

And hire self w'ende hem fram. 
pg Flgris first spfke bigan: 

25 


‘Ure Lgverd/ he sede, ‘pat makedest 
pe ich ponke”, Codes sune, 

man, 


pat ich am to mi leof icume. 

30 

^ kessinge. 

. * not in MS. ® biheold. 

* 0, not in MS. 

* muchel, as 

occasionally. ® >inges. crie)?. 

® niwe. 

nammore. 

hiire, as occasionally. lo*** furst. 

J)onki. 



FLORIS AND BLAUNCHEFLUR 


39 


Ml leof, nu ich habbe "pe funded 
Of al ml care ich am unbunde/ 

Nu ai]?er hap oj^er itgid 
Of here sore5e and care c§ld, 
pat hi hadde ifunde bQ 5 

Sip]De hi were idfid atw§. 

Nu hi cleppen^ and kisse ‘'j 
And maken togadere michel blisse; 

If per was a3t bute kiste ^ 

Swete Blauncheflur hit wiste. 20 

Ngn dper hevene hi ne bfde 
Bute evre swiche® llf to Ifde. 

Ac Ipnge ne mijte hi hem wite 
pat hi neren underjete, 

For® pe Admiral hadde such a wune, 15 

Jch^ moretid per moste cume 

Two maidenes wip michel honur 

Up® into pe he^este tur, 

pat were feire and swipe® hende; 

pat gn his hfved for t 6 kembe, 20 

pat oper®**' bringe towaille and bSLcin 

For to wasse his hpnden in. 

Swiche him serven^® a day sg faire, 

A moreje moste anoper peire. 

Ac mfst were wuned^^ into pe tur 25 

Maide Claris and Blauncheflur. 

Clarice, joie hire m 5 t bitide, 

Arps up in pe more^entlde. 

And hap cleped^® Blauncheflur 

To g§ wip hire into pe tur. >0 

Quap Blauncheflur, *Ich am cominge,' 

Ac hco hit spde al slepinge. 

^ iftmde. ® cleppe]?. ® cusse>. ■* custe. ® swich. ® vor. etc. 

® up, not in MS. ® snj>e. not in MS. serve]?. iwnned. icluped. 



40 


L THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


Claris com into })e tur; 
pe Admiral axede Blauncheflur. 

‘ Sire, al ni^t at hire ^ boke 
Heo hap® pcron irad and loke, 

And peron b^de® hire oresun 
pat God pat polede passiun 
pe hglde, Sire, Ignge alive; 

And nu heo is asleped swipe 
pat heo ne mai come to pe. 

‘Is pat sope^?’ sfde he. 

Heo sfde, ‘50, Sire, withute If sing.' 
‘Heo is,’ he sfde, ‘a swete ping, 
Wei a5te ich willen hire to wif 
pat SQ 5erne biddep ml lif.’ 

A moreje pg Claris arist 
Blauncheflur heo atwist 
pat he makede zg Ignge demere'\ 

‘ Aris,’ heo sfde, ‘ and gg we i fere.’ 
Quap Blauncheflur, *Ich come anpn/ 
Ac Flfris cleppefi hire bigon, 

And heo® him alsg unwise, 

And felle’’’ aslepe one pis wise. 

p9 Clarice to pe piler com, 

And pe bacin of golde n5m 
To bfre wip hire into pc tur, 

Heo Idkede after Blauncheflur. 

p9 Clarice com into pe tur, 

He axede after Blauncheflur: 

‘Sire, ich wende hire finde here, 
Heo® was arise are ich were; 

Nis heo no^t icume 5ete?' 

Quap he, ‘Heo dutep me to lite,’ 

^ heo set at hire. * and ha]?. ® ibede. * so]>. 

® ht. ^ feolle. ® hp. 


io 


15 


20 


25 


30 


® demure. 



FLORIS AND BLAUNCHEFLUR 


41 


He clfpede^ 16 him his chaumberlajn, 

And het him gg wij> alle mayn 
For to wite whi heo ne come^ 

To his hfste swlj>e® sone. 

For]? he wende sone angn, 5 

To hire chaumbre J>at he com. 

In hire bedde he fgnd twg, 

Wei faste iclept^, aslepe b§ 

Neb to neb, and mu]p 16 mu]?; 

Sone were here sore^en® cuj?. 10 

To J?e Admiral sone he tej 
And tglde him what he ise^. 
pe Admiral het his swerd bringe ; 

Iwite he wolde of pis ® pinge. 

Forp he wende wip al his mayn, 15 

He and his cbaumberlayn ; 

In pe bed he^ fgnd tweie, 
git was pe slep in here eie. 

He let adun pe clgpes caste 

Binfpen here breste; 20 

Bi here breste he knew angn 

pat gn was maide and pat oper mon®. 

pe children awgke pg angn, 

And seje pe Admiral bifgre® hem ggn 

Wip his swerd al adra^e; 25 

Sgre hi ben offerd, and wel ma^e. 

‘ Seie/ quap pe Admiral, ‘ belamy, 

H6 makede pe’ sg hardy 
For to come into mi tur, 

And to ligge bi Blaunchefiur ? ^ 30 

Hi crien^® him mere! bgpe swipe 
pat he ^ive hem first of live. 

^ clupede. ® cume. ® suthe, as occasionally. * iclupt. * sorej’en, 
^ J>us. heo. ® a men. ^ bevore. cries. 



42 


/. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


^ isend. 


After his barnage he ha]? isent^ 

To awrfke him wij? jugement, 

And let hem pe while binde faste 
And into prison ben icaste. 

His palais fjat was sg faire ibild® 

Of erles and barons it was ifild \ 

Up he stod amgng hem alle, 

Bi semblaunt wel wrg]? wiJjalJe : 

' Lprdinges/ he sfde, ‘ wij? michel honur 
5e habbe iherd of Blauncheflur, 

Hu ich hire bo^te apli^t 

For seve sij?e of gpld hire wi^t; 

To hire was mi mfste wene 
For to habbe to mi quene. 

Nis no5t 59re J:at in^ ich com, 

And fpnd hire wi]? horeddm®, 
me to schame and deshonur 
In hire bedde on ml tur. 

Ich habbe 50U tpld hu hit is went; 
Awrfke]? me wijj jugement/ 
panne spak a freo burgeis 
pat was hende and curteis: 

^ Sire, are hi beo to df pe ® awrfke, 

We mote ihere pe children spfkc ; 

Hit nere no^t elles ri5t'^ jugement 
Wiputen answare to acupement/ 
pe king of NubTe sfde pp, 

"Forsop, ne schal hit no^t gf sg; 

Hit is ri3t pure^ alle ping 
Felons inome hpndhabbing 
For to sufFre jugement 
Wipute answ'are pper acupement/ 

^ ibuld. ® ifuld. * ine. 

^ di^e. list. 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


* hordom. 



FLORIS AND BLAUNCHEFLUR 


43 


^ sende]). 


After pe children nu me senden^* 
Hem to berne fir me tenden^ 

Seide Flgris to Blaunchefiur, 

‘ Of ure Ilf nis ng sucur, 

Ac mm is Jje gilt®, and J^e unmf}> 
pat pu for me schalt pglTe dfp;^ 

Ac if kinde^ hit pglie mi3te 
Ich o^te deie twye wip ri^te, 

Q dfp for pe, gn oper for me, 

For pis pu pglest nu for me. 

For if T nere into pis tur icume, 

Wip mire^pe pu mijtest herinne wune.' 

He dro3 forp a riche ring 
His moder 3af him at his parting: 

‘ Have pis ring, lemman min, 
pu mi3t® ng3t deie while® he is pin/ 
pe ring he havep forp ara3t 
And to Blaunchefiur bita3t. 

‘ pe ring ne schal nevre aredde me, 
For dfp ne mai ich se on pe/ 
pe ring heo wolde a5e xfche 
And to Flgris him bitfche ; 

Ac for al pat heo mi3te do, 

He him nolde a5€n ifo. 

And pe ring bi gne stunde 
Fel adun to pe grunde. 

A due stupede and him upnom, 

And was perof wel blTpe mon. 

Nu pes childre forp me bringe®* 

To here dom al wepinge, 

Ac per nas ngn sg stirne'^ mon 
pat hem lokede upon, 

2 tende]). ® gtild. * cunde. 

® ]>e while. bringe]?. stnme. 


lo 


15 


20 


25 


30 


® ne mijt. 



44 


7. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


* suj)e fa5e. 


pat nokle p9 swipe 

pat jugement were wipdra^e; 

For Fl^ris was sQ fair 3ongling, 

And Blaunchefiur S9 swete ping, 

Of men and wimmen pat ben^ nupe, 
pat gg and se® and spfke^ wip mupe, 

Ne ben sp faire in here gladnesse 
Sg hi were in here sormesse. 

Ac pe Admiral was SQ wrop and wod 
He quakede for grame per he stod, 

And het hem binde wel faste 
And intd pe fire caste. 

pe due pat pe ring funde 
Cbm to pe Admiral and runde, 

And al togadere he gan him schewe 
Of pat pe children were biknewe. 
pe Admiral let hem a^en cl§pe, 

For he wolde wip Flgris sp|ke. 

*Sire,’ quap Flgris, Horsop ich telle 
pu no3test no3t pat maide quelle; 

Of al pis gilt ich am to wite, 

Ich ojte deie and heo gg quite.' 

Quap BlauncheflOr, ‘Aquel pu me, 

And let Flgris alive be; 

gif® hit nere for mi luve 

He nere no^t fram his Ignde icome. 

Quap pe Admiral, ‘Sg ich mote gg, 
ge schulle deie togadere bg ; 

Miself ich wille me awrfke, 

Ne schulle ^e nevre gg ne spfke.' 

Flgris forp his nekke bfd. 

And Blaunchefiur wipdra^e him ^et; 
Blaunchefiur bid forp hire swire*’, 

And Flgris a^en hire gan tire, 

® bii]), as occasionally. ^ seo]). •* spekej). ® $ef. ® 


lO 


15 


20 


25 


30 


swere. 



FLORIS AND BLAUNCHEFLUJR 


45 


Neij^er ne mi 3 le J)ere jjgle 
])at 5)?er deide bifgre. 

p 9 pe Admiral, he wrgp were, 
per he chaungede his chere ; 

For eyper^ wolde for oper deie, 

And he^ se^ mam wepinge® eie, 

And for he luvede sp muche pat inai, 

A1 wepinge he turned away. 

His swerd fel of his hgnd t5 grunde, 

Ne mi^te he hit hglde pilke^ stunde. 

pe due pat here ring hadde, 

For hem to spfke wille he hadde: 

‘ Sire Admiral,^ he sfde, ‘ hvis 

Hit is pe wel iTtel pris 

pis feire children for t5 quelle ; 

Ac betere hit is pat hi pe telle 
Hu he com into pi tur 
To ligge per bl Blauncheflur. 

His engin whan pu hit wite 
pe betere wip dper pu mi^t pe ^^ite.^ 
Alle pat herde w’ordes his 
Bisechen®pat he graunte® pis. 

Fie het him telle his engin, 

Hu he to Blauncheflur com in, 

And hd®* him radde and help parto. 

‘ pat,’ quap he, ‘ nelle ich nevre do 
For ping pat me mai mf do, 

Bute hit hem beo forgive also.* 

Alle pe dpere bisechen® pis, 

And of pe Admiral igranted is. 

Nu 5rd and ende he hap hem tgld*^; 
Hu Blauncheflur® was fram him sqld®, 

^ he se5 ]>&t eyjjer. ® for he. ^ Wepinde. * J-tilke. 

to. ® bisechej?* itold. ^ ® blachefiur^ 


lo 


15 


20 


25 


30 


® graunti. 
^ isold. 



46 


I. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


^ and hu. 
® failed 


riu^ he -was of Spaygne a kinges sone 
For hire luve f)ider® icume. 

To fQnden wi]? sume ginne 
Hu he mi3te hire awinne ; 

And hu, ]?ure3 Ipe cupe and J>c^ gersume, 5 

*pe porter was his man bicume, 

And hu he was in a cupe ibgre. 

Alle J?es opere lowe perfgre^. 

pe Admiral ]:g, wel him bitide, 
pat child he sette^ bl his side; 10 

And hap for5ive his wrappe bp, 

Tigris and Blauncheflur alsg, 

And sfde wip him hi scholde be 
pe beste of al his maine. 

And Flgris he makep stgnde upny, 15 

And per he dubbede him to kni3t. 

Nu bgpe togadere pes childre for blisse 
Falle® t6 his fet, hem to kisse; 

He let hem t6 gne chirche bringe, 

And spusen hem wip gne gold ringe. 20 

pure3 pe red of Blauncheflur 
Me fette Claris adun pe^ tur. 
pe Admiral hire nam to quene; 
pilke fgste was wel breme, 

For per was alle kinnes® gleo 25 

pat mi3te at enl bridale® beo. 

Hit nas perafter ngping Ignge 
pat per c 5 m to Tigris writ and sgnde, 
pat pe king his fader was dfd 
And pat he scholde nimen his r|d. 30 

panne seide pe AdmiraiP®, 

Hf pu dost bi mi consail, 

® jjuder. * Jjures j?e. * ])ervore. ® set. 

^ of j?e. ® ktinnes. ® briddale. Admiral. 



THE DEBATE OF THE BODY AND THE SOUL 47 


Bilff wi]? me, and wende na5t liQm ; 

Ich wille 5eve ]5e a kinedom 
Al SQ Igng and al br^d, 

Alsg evre ^et ]>l fader bpd^' 

Ac Flgrls nolde for np winne, 5 

Levere him were wij? his kinne. 
pe Admiral he bid godday, 

And ponkede Claris pat faire* may, 

And to hire he hap iodide 

Twentl pund of rfde^ golde; 10 

And to Daris pat him sp ta^te 
Twentl pund he ara^te, 

And alle pat for him diden ei dfl 
He 5fld here while swipe web 
He bita^te hem alle God AImi3te, 15 

And com hgm when he mi5te. 

He w^as king wip michel honur, 

And heo his queue Blauncheflur, 

Nu 3e haven ^ iherd pane ende 
Of Flpris and his lemman hehde, 20 

Hu after bale comep bote. 

God leve pat us S9 mote, 
pat we him mote lovie sq 
pat we mote to hevene gq. Amem 


IV. THE DEBATE OF THE BODY AND THE SOUL 

Als I lay in a winteris ny^t^ 25 

In a drdupening*^ bifgr pe day, 

Forsdpe® I sauj a selly sy3t'’', 

A body on a here lay, 

^ ibod. ® pond of ride, * habbej), * nyt. ^ dronkening* 

* Yorso]je. ** syt. 



48 


/. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


^ Intel. 

* koweynte, 
nou5t. 


pat liavede ben a niody kny^t 
And liteP served God to pay%* 

Lgren he haved pe lives ly^t, 

pe g§st was dute and scholde away. 

Wan pe ggst it scholde gg, 

It ^ biwente and withstod, 

Biheld** the body pere it cam fro 
Sq serfulll with dredll mod; 

It seide, ‘ Weile and walaw9 ! 

Wq worpe pi fleys, p! fdule blod. 
Wreche bodi w^y list du® sg, 

pat 5wilene were wilde and wod? 

‘ pdu pat were woned t5 ride 
Hey 5 e on horse in and out, 

Sg kweynte® knijt ikuS'^ sg wide, 

As a l^n fers and proud, 
gwere is al pi michele pride, 

And pi lede pat was sg loud? 
gwi list du pere sg bare o side® 

Ipricked in pat pore schrdud? 

‘ gwere ben pi wurSIi ® wedes, 
pi somers with pi riche beddes, 
pi proude palefreys and pi stedes? 

pat pdd about in dester leddes? 
pi faufduns pat were w^ont“ to grede, 
And pine hdundes pat pou fedde’^? 
Me pinkep God is pe to gnede, 

pat alle pine frend beon frg pe fledde. 

^ payj. ® yt, as often. * biheold. 

^ knit ikud. ® bareside. ® mnrdli. 

12 ledde. 


30 


15 


20 


25 


® listouj, 
haddest. 



THE DEBATE OF THE BODY AND THE SOUC 49 


‘gwere beon ]>T caslles and ])i tbures, 
pi chaumbres and pi riche halles 
Ipcynted with s§ riche fldures, 

And pi liche rgbes alle? 

pine cowites and pi covertoures, 5 

pi cendels and pi riche palles ? 

Wreche, ful derk' is nou® pi bour; 

Tomoruwe pou® schalt perinne falle. 

‘gwere ben pine cokes snelle, 

pat scholden gpn greipe pi mfte 10 

With spfces swete for to smelle, 
pat pdii nevere were® fol of frfte, 

To do pat foule fleys to swelle 
pat fdule wormes scholden fte? 

And pou havest pe pine of helle 15 

With glotonye me bigfte. . . / 

‘ For God pe schop ® aftir his schaft 
And gaf pe bppe wyt and skil ; 

In pi loking was I laft 

To wisse aftir pin oune wil. 20 

Ne I6c I nevere wychecraft, 

l^e w'lst I 3wat 'svas god® npr il. 

Bote as a wretche dumb and daft®, 

Bote as tuu taugtest me’® pertil. 

-- 

‘ Set to serven pe t 5 queme 25 

Bppe at even and at morn ”, 

Sipin I was pe bitau3t to jeme, 

Frp pe lime pat pdu w'as born, 
pdu pat dedes cdupest deme 

Scholdest habbe be war bifom $0 

^ wrechede it is. * nouj, as often. * 3>on5, as often, but iHways 

printed * to, from Auch. MS. * werere. * schop Jtc. schap. 

* guod, as often. ® mad. me, not in MS. morwen. 



50 


/. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


^ semet. 
® S'eot- 


Of mi folye, as it seme’; 

Nou wij? ))rselve thou art forlorn.’ 

pe gast it seyde, ‘ Bodi be stille 1 
5\vo ha]3 Ifred pe al pis wite 
pat givest me pese wordes grille, 5 

pat list per bollen as a bite? 

Wenest ou, wretche, po^ thou fille 
Wip pi foule fleisch® a pite, 

Of alle dedes thou didest ille 
pat pou sg li^tli® schalt be quite? lo 

* Wenest ou nou to ^ gete pe grip 
per pou list rgten in pe clay? 
pey pou be rgtin pile and pip, 

And blowen %vip pe wind away, 
get® schalt ou come wip lime and lyp 15 

Agein to me on domesday. 

And come to court and I pe wip 
For to kepen cure harde pay. 

*To tfche were®*^ pou me bitau^t; 

Ac 5\van poii pou^test of pe qugd, 20 

Wip pi tep pe bridel pou lau^t, 
pou dist al pat I pe forbgd. 

To sinne® and schame it w^as pi drau^t, 

Til Untid and til wikkedehfd; 

Inou5 I stdd ageyn and fau5t, * 25 

Bot ai pou nome pin oune rfd. 

*Wan I pe wolde leme and tfche 
gwat®* was yvel and ^wat w^as god, 

Of Crist ne kirke w^as ng spgche, 

Bote renne abdute and breyde wod ; 30 

® £eichs, as often. ® litli, * to, from Aiich. MS. 

* 5 were. ® smine, as usually. 5wat not in MS. breyd. 



THE DEBATE OF THE BODY AND THE SOUL 51 


I mi^te preye and prfche, 

Ne mi5te I nevere wende pi mod 
pat pou woldest God knoulfche, 

But don al pat pin herte to ^ stod. 

‘ I .bad pe penke on soulenedes % 5 

Matines, masse, and evesgng ; 

Thou mostist first don opere dedes^ 
pou seidist al was idel ggng. 

To wode and water and leld thou edest, 

Pr to court ^ to do men wrgng; 10 

Bote for pride or grettore medes® 

Litel® pdu dlst*^ god amgng. 

'Ho may mgre trayson d5. 

Or his® Jgverd betere engine, 
pan he pat al his trist is to, i$ 

In and out® as oune hyn? 

Ay seppe pdu was priven and prg, 

Mi3tis did’° I alle mine, 

To porveie” pe rest and ro, 

And pdu to bringe me in pine. 20 

‘Ndu mduwe pe wilde bfstes renne 
And lien under Unde and iff, 

And fdules file bi feld and fenne, 

Sipin pi false herte clff. 

pine ei^ene are blinde and connen nou5t kenne, 25 
pi mouth is dumb, pin fre is dff; 

And ndu sg Igpli^® pdu list grenne, 

Frg pe comep a wikke w^f. 

^ to, not in MS. ® soulenede. ® dede. * conr. * mede. 

® Intel. dust ® is, as in next line. ® oujt minis ded, 

porveje. “ lodli. 


B a 



52 


/, THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


‘ Ne nis ng Ifvedi brijt on ble, 

pat wel were woned^ of f?e to lete, 
pat wolde lye a ni3t^ bl pe 

For nou5t^ pat men mi5te hem bihete. 
poll art unsemly for to se, 5 

Uncomli for to kissen s\\ete^; 
pou ne havest frend pat ne wolde fie. 

Come pou stertlinde in pe strete/ 

pe bodi it seide, ‘ Ic sej^e, 

Cast, pou hast wrgng iwys 10 

Al pe gilt® on me to ley^e, 
pat pou hast lorn pi mikil blis. 

Were was I b! wode or wey^e, 

Sat or stod or dide ou^t mys, 
pat I ne was ay under pin ey^e? 15 

Wei pou wgst pat soth it is®, 

‘ Wedir I ede up or ddun, 
pat I ne bar pe on my bac, 

Als pin as frg toun to toun, 

Alse pou"^ me lete have rap and rac? 20 

pat tou ne were and rede ® roun 
Nevere did I ping ne spac; 

Here pe sope se men mowen 
On me pat ligge sg® big and blac. 

^For al pe wile pou were ml fere 25 

I hadde al pat me was ned, 

I mi^te spfke, se and here, 

I ede and rgd and drank and et, 

Lgpli chaunged^® is my chere 

Sin pe tyme pat pou me let; 30 

^ iwoned. ® n^th. ® nousth. * cussen suwete. ® wyt, * ys. 
’’ als se j>oa5. ® red. ^ here so. lodli chaunched. • 



THE DEBATE OF THE BODY AND THE SOUL 53 


Dff and dumb I ligge on bere, 
pat 1 ne may sterin hand ne fet. 

‘I scholde have ben dumb as a schep, 

Or as an ouwe or as a swyn 
pat et and drank and lai and slep, 5 

Slayn, and passid al his pin; 

Nevere of cat^l nome^ kep, 

Ne wyste wat was water ne wyn, 

Ne leyn in helle pat is sg dep, 

Ne were pe wit pat al was pin.®' 10 

pe gast it^ seide, ‘Is ng doute; 

Abduten, bodi, pou me tiar; 
pdu mdstist nede, I was wipoute 
Hand and fot, I was wel war. 

Bote as tdu bere me aboute 15 

Ne mi^t I do pe Ifste char; 
pgrf^re most I nede loute,* 

S9 doth pat ngn oper dar.^- 

‘ Of 9 wymman born and bredde, 

Body, were we hope tw9; 20 

Tdgidre fostrid fayre and fedde 
Til pou coupist spfke and gg. 

Softe pe for love 1 ledde, 

Ne dorst I nevere do pe wq; 

To lese pe sg spre I dredde^ ^ 25 

And wel I wiste to gete* na mg, 

‘For me pou woldest sumwat do 
WjTle pou were 5ong a litil first, 

For frendes eyje pat pe stod to, 

pe wile pdu were bftin and birst; 30 

^ he ne. ® nevere ne wist of al J)at was tin, ® y£, as often. ^ getin. 



54 


/. THE MIDLANO DIALECT 


Oc wan pou were ])riven and ]?r§, 

And knewe hunger, cgld and f>irst,^ 

And jhwilk was eyse, rest and ro, 

A1 Jjin oune wil poU dist. 

‘I saw jpe fair on fleysch and blod 5 

And al mi love on pe I kest; 
pat pou prive me pou^te god, 

And let pe haven ro and rest, 
pat made pe sg stirne^ of m5d, 

And of werkes s§ unwrest; 10 

To fi3te with pe ne was n9 hot 
Me pat pdu bar in p! brest. 

^Gloterie and lecherie, 

Pride® and wicke coveytise, 

Nipe and Qnde and envie 75 

To God of hevene and alle hise, 

And in unlust for to lye, 

Was ti wone in alle wise*; 

That I schal noii ful dere abye, 

A, weyle ! S9re may me grise, 20 

'pou was warned her bif^re, 
gwat we^ bgpe scholden have; 

Idel tale held tou pat p9re 
pou sau5 ffle dun® in grave, 
pou dist al pat pe Averld pe bad, 25 

And pat pi fleys pe wolde crave; 

1 p 9 lede pe and dide*^ as mad 
To be maister and I pi ciiave.’ 

"Iwenest® pou, ggst, pe geyned ou^t® 

For t5 quite pe wipal, 30 

^ virst. ® stume. ® prude. * waste wane non of j)ise. 

® we, not in MS. ® bi dun. ^ dide, not in MS. ® iweneste. * out. 



THE DEBATE OF THE BODY AND THE SOUL 


55 


pou pat was sp worpll^ wrou^t, 

To seye I made pe my pral? 

Did^ I nevere on live nou^t, 

I ne rafte ne I ne stal 
pat first ® of pe ne cam pe pou 5 t ; 

Aby it pat aby5e schal ! 

5wat wist I wat \vas wrong or riht*, 

Wat to take or ^wat to schone, 

Bote pat pou pottest in ml sijht® 
pat al pe wisdom scholdest cone? 
5 wanne pou me tau3tist pn untight®, 

And me gan peroffe mono, 

Panne did^ I al my mi^ht^ 

Anoper time to have my wone. 

‘Oc haddist pou, pat Crist it oupe, 

Given me honger, pirst ® and cgld, 

And pou wilest me pat n§ god coupe, 

In bismere ^wan I was sg bglJ, 
pat I hadde undernomen in joupe 
I havede hglden ^wan I was gld®, 
pou let me reykin north and south 
And haven al my wille on wgld. 

‘pou scholdist for ng llf ne Ignd^^, 

Ne for ngn oper worldes winne, * ' / 
Have sofFrid me to lein gn hgi^, 

^ pat havede tornd to schame or sinne®'^ 
""Oc for I pe sg else fgnd, 

And pi wretche wit sg pinne’®, 
pat ay was wrlpinde as a wgnd, 
perfgre’^ coupe I nevere blinne. 

1 wordli, ® dud. ® furst. * rith, ® pottist . - . sbth. 

^ inisth. ^ vurst, ® I havede holden old, for loud, 

as occasionally, with so ]>uiine. J?efore. 


lo 


15 


20 


25 


50 

® nnti5th. 
sunne. 



56 


7 . THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


* T 0 sinne f>ou wistist was my kinde, 

As mankinne it is al sg, 

And lo J)e wretche world sg mmde, 

And to f)e fend ]:)at is ure ^ fg. 
poii scholdest fr have late me binde 5 

Wan I misdede, and don me wg ; 

Ac jwanne pe blmde lat pe blinde, 

In dike he fallen bgpe twg/ 

Thg bigan pe ggst to wepe, 

And seide, ‘Bodi, alias, alias, 
pat 1 pe lovede evere ^ete, 

For al mt love on pe I las. 
pat tou lovedest me poii lete,^^, 

And madest me an houve of glas ; 

I dide al pat pe was sete, 

And pou my traytor evere was. 

‘ pe fend of helle pat havep envie ^ 

To mankinne ^ and evere hap had, 

Was in us as is sple 
To do sum god ^wan I pe bad. 20 

The werld he toe to cumpaynie®, 
pat mani a soule haved forrad; 
pey pre wisten pi folye, 

And maden wretche, ]'e al mad. 

‘gwan I bad pe reste take, 25 

Forsake sinne ay and gg, 

Do penaunge, faste and wake, 
pe fend^ seide, ‘pou schalt nou^t sg, 
pus^ sone al pi blisse forsake, 

To liven ay in pine and wg! 30 

^ ore, as often. le. ^ envi5e, ^ mankune. * as a. ® enm- 

panije. ® madin. fe, ® I^os. 




THE DEBATE OF THE BODY AND THE SOUL 57 


Joje ^ and blisse I rede pon make, 

And J?enke to live 5eres mg, 

* gwan I bad te Ifve pride, 

pi manle mes, pi riche schroud, 
pe false world pat stod biside, 5 

Bad pe be ful quoynte and proud; 
pi fleysch with riche rgbes .schride, 

Nou^t als a beggare in a clout®, 

And on heye horse t 5 ride 

Wip mikel meyne in and out 10 

^ 3 wan I bad pe *f rliche to rise, 

Niin of^ me pi soul§„kep, 
pbu seidest thou mi^test a ngne wise 
Forggn pe mirie® morweslep. 

W3an 36 hadden set your sise, 15 

5e ® pre traytours, sgre I wep ; 

Ye ladde me wip 50ure^ enprise, 

As pe bochere® dop his schep. 

‘ gwan 36 ® pre traitours at 9 tale 

Togidere weren agein me sworn, 20 

Ar 56 maden trotevale 
pat I haved seid biforn. 
ge ledde me bi doune and dale 
As an oxe bi pe horn,^ 

Til per as him is browen bale 25 

per his prgte schal be schorn. 

‘For love pi wille I folewede al, 

And to min oune dfth 1 drou3. 

To foluwe pe pat was mi pral,^’"'^*' 

pat evere were false and frou3 ; So 

^ ioyje. ^ clou^t, ® oujt. * on. ® mnrie. * }’e 

^ wid oure. ® l)o]?elere ; Ancb,. MS, bucher^ ® je, not in MS, 



58 


7. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


^ wistin. 

® herte anon, 
wrong. 


pou it dist and I forhal. 

We wisten^ wel it was WOU5 ; 
perfgre mote we kepe Ore fal, 

Pine and schame and sorewe inou3c 

‘pei3 alle ]:e men non under mone 
To demen weren sete on benche, 
pe schames pat us schullen be done 
Ne schulden^ halven dfl bipenche®. 
Ne helpep us ng bfde ne bone, 

Ne may us ndu n§ wyl towrenche; 
Hellehoundes comen ^ nou sone, 

Forpi ne mouwe we noyper blenche.' 

gwan pat bodi say pat gast® 
pat mpne and al pat soruwe make, 

It seide, ' Allas, pat mi llf hath last, 
pat I have lived for sinne sake, 
pat min herte® ne hadde tobrast^, 
gwan I was fram mi moder take; 

I mi3te have ben in erpe kast®, 

And lei3en and rpted® in a lake. 

* panne haved I nevere lerned 
gwat was yviP*^, ne ^wat was god, 

Ne np ping with wrpnge^^ 5ernd, 

Ne pine ppled as I mot, 
gwere np seint mi3te bfren ure^* ernde 
To him pat bou5te us with his blod, 
In helle 3wanne we ben bemd^® 

Of sum mere! to don us bot.’ 

‘Nay, bodi, nay’\ nou is t 5 late 
For to preien^® and to prfehe, 

^ schnldin. ® bij>enke. * cometh. 

^ toborste. ® kest. ® ileijen and iroted. 
® is. brend. nay, from Auch. MS. 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 

® gost. 
uvilne. 
prebe. 



7 HE DEBATE OF THE BODY AND THE SOUL 59 


* ate. 

® wyves. 


Nou ]?e wayn is atte^ ^ate, 

And J>i tonge ha]? leid J?e spfche. 

Q poynt of ure pine to bate, 

In ]?e world ne is ng Ifche ; 

A1 tegidere we ggn g gate, 5 

Swilk is Codes harde wrfche. 

® Ac haddest ]?ou a litel fr, 
gwTle us was llf togidre lent, 
pg p2it was sg sek and sfr, 

Us schriven and pe devel schent, 10 

And laten renne a reuly tfr, 

And bihi3t amendement^ 

Ne ]?orte us have fri^t ne f|r, 

pat God ne wolde us blisse have sent®. 

‘pey alle pe men pat ben 0 lyve® 15 

Weren prestes, messes for* to singe, 

And alle pe maidenes and pe wyve*^ 

Wydew^es, hgndene for to wringe. 

And mi3te sweche® fyve 

> Als is in werld of alle pinge, 20 

Sipin we ne mouwen us selven schrive, 

Ne schulde us into blisse bringe. 

‘Eodi, 1 may np m^re dwelle, 

Ne stgnde for to spfke wdth*pe; 

Hellehoundes here I 3elle, 25 

And fendes mg pan men mowe se, 
pat comen to fette me to helle, 

Ne may I n95wer ® from hem fle ; 

And pbu schalt comen with fieys and felle 

A domesday t5 wone® with me.*' 30 

^ his blisse tis seut. ® lyves. * for, not in MS. 

® suweche. sulven. ® nowed^r. ® wonie. 



6o 


^ haddin. 
a brod. 


/. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 

Ne havede it nou fr ]?e word isejd, 

It ne wiste ^wider it scholde gg ; 

In abreken at a breid 
A J?dusend develene and ^et mg. 

5wan thei hadden ^ on him le}’d 5 

Here scharpe cloches alle pg, 

It was in a sgrl pleyt, 

Reullche toyled to and frg. 

For thei weren ragged, roue and tayled. 

With brgde bulches on here bac; lo 

Scharpe clauwes, Ignge nayled, 

Ng was ng lime withoute lac. 

On alle halve it was asayled 
With mani a devel foul and blac; 

Mere! criende llteP availede 15 

jwan CrTst it wolde sg harde wrac. 

Some pe chaules it towraste* 

And 5gten in J?e Ifd al hgt, 

And bedin him to drinke faste, 

And shenke abduten him abrgt^. 20 

A devil kani ]?er atte® laste 
pat w^as maister, wel I wgt ; 

A colter glowende in him he praste 
pat it poru3 pe herte smgt®. 

Gleyves glowende some setten'* 25 

To bac and brest and bgpe sides,^ 
pat in his herte pe poyntes metliri, 

And maden him pg woundes wide, 

And seiden him fol w’el he lette 

pe herte pat was sg fol of pride ; 30 

* Intel. ® towrasten. * senke abouten bim 

® ate. * herte it smot. 



THE DEBATE OF THE BODY AND THE SOUL 6i 


Wei he it hadde ]>at men him hette \ 

For mpre scholde it bitIde. 

WorJjli^ wedes for to wfre 

pei seiden pat he lovede best ; 

A develes CQpe for 15 bfre, 5 

A1 brennynde on him was kest, 

With hpte haspes imad t 6 spfre 
pat streite sat to bac and brest; 

An helm pat was iTtel ® to hf re 
Kam him, and^ an hors al prest. lo 

Forth was brou^t perewith a bridel, 

A corsed devel als a cpte, 

pat grisliche grennede and ^fnede wide, 
pe ley^e it lemede of his prpte ; 

With a sadel to the midside 15 

Fol of scharpe pikes schgte, 

Alse an hechele on® t 6 ride; 

Al was glowende, ilke a grpte. 

Upon® pat sadil he was sloungen, 

As he scholde to pe tornement; 

An hundred devel on him dongen 
Her and per pan he was hent ; 

With hpte spfres poru^ was stongen, 

And wip oules al torent ; 

At ilke dint pe sparkles sprongen 
As of a brpnd pat were forbrent'^. 

gwan he hadde riden® pat rpde 
Upon pe sadil per he was set, 

He was kast doun as a tpde, 

And hellehoundes to him were let® 30 

^ bihette. ® wordli. ® lutel. * anon him kam. * onne. 

* Opon. forbrend. ® reden. * led. 




62 


L THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


pat broiden out peces br§de, 

Als he to belle ward was fet; 

Ther alle pe fendes fet it trgde^ 

Men mi3te of blod foluwe pe tred. 

He beden him honten^ and blowen, 

Crlen on Bauston and Bewis, 
pe ratches pat him w^ere w^oned to® knowen 
He scholden sone bio we pe prTs ; 

An hundred develes, on® a rowe, 

With stringes him drowen, unpanc his, 

Til he kome to pat l§pll^ lowe 
per helle was, I wgt to wis. 

gwan it kani to pat wikke won, 
pe fendes kasten swilk® a jel, 
pe erpe it gpenede anpn, 

Smpke and smoper up it wel®; 

Bgpe of'^ pick and of^ brimstgn®, 

Men my^te fif mile have pe smeL 
Lpverd, wp schal him be bigpn 
pat hap perofFe pe tenpe dfl! 

gwan pe ggst pe sope isej, 

"^V^ider® it scholde, it kaste a crl, 

And seide, ‘ Jesu jLhat sittest on hey, 

On me, pi scKap, nw have mercl. 

Ne schope pou me pat art sg sly^? 

pi crfature al sg \vas I 
Als man pat sittes pe sg ny^, 
pat pdu ha vest sg wH don by. 

*pou pat wistest al biforn^^, 

W31 schope pou me t 5 wrgper hfle, 

^ hontin. ® te. ® ratches on. * lodli. ® 

* wal. of, from Anch. MS. ® brumston. ® w^icle. 

as usual ; Crist added, but incorrectly for metre. bifor. 


5 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 

suwilk. 

Ihu, 



THE DEBATE OF THE BODY AND THE SOUL 63 


To be pus togged and totorn \ 

And oj^ere to haven al ml wfle ? 
p9 pat scholden be forlgrn. 

Wretches pat tou mi^test spfle, 

A, weikj lest ou hem be born, 5 

To 56 ve pe fcSule fend sq ffle?^ 

Agein him pe fendes gonnen crle *, 

‘ Caitif, helpep pe na mgre 
To calle on Jesus ne Marie, 

Ne to crie Cristes gre. 10 

Lgren pou havest the cumpainye, 
pou havest served us sg 5gre ; 
parfgre nou pou schalt abye ^ 

As dpere pat leven on ure Igre/ 

pe fdule fendes pat weren fayn, 25 

Bl top and tail he slongen hit, 

And kesten it with my3t and mayn 
Doun into the develes pit, 
per sonne ne schal nevere be seyn; 

Hemself he sonken in permit; 
pe erpe himself^ it lek a5eyn, 

Angn pe donge it was fordit. 

W5an it was forth, pat foule Igd 
T 5 hellewel gr it 'were day. 

On ilk a her a drgpe stod ^5 

For fri5t and ler per as I lay; 

To Jesu Crist with mllde mod 
5 erne 1 kalde and lokede ay, 
gwan pg fendes hgt and wod^ 

Come to fette me away. 3 o 

A totoren. ^ criae, * hem sulf, * hot fot. 



64 


I. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


I f>onke him J^at Jjglede dfth, 

His michele ^ mere! and his §re, 
pat schllde me fram mam a qufd, 

A sinful ® man as I lai pgre. 
p9 alle sinful I ® rede hem rf d 
To schrlven hem and rewen spre; 
Nevere was sinne idon grft 
pat Cristes mercl ne is wel mgre. 


V. ADAM AND EVE 
Eve hap Sep jdadde 

To Paradys as Adam badde^ lo 

And* Eve drou^ hir fram pe 5ate, 

Sche ne® durst noujt loke in perate, 

Sche durst nou^t schewe God hir face, 

Bot lete Sep abide grace. 

And Sep in pilke stfde, -15 

Sgre wepeand, in hgly bfde, 

He abgd per alle stille 
Codes piercl and Codes wille. 

purch® pe vertu of Codes mi^t 
per com adoun an angel bri^t, 20 

And seyd to Sep in pis manerc^, 
pat he mi^t wip fren here : 

^ God pat al pe warld hap wrou5t 
Sent pe word, pdu biddest for noujt, 

Er pe terme® be yggn 25 

Of five pousende winter and gn. 

And five and twenti winter and mg. 

^ muchele. ® sunful, as also in next line. ^ j,o ] at sunful ben. 

* “J, as often * no, as always. ® Jjurth. ^ maner. * terra. 



ADAM AND DVE 


^5 


Jr ];at terme ' be agg, 

And God ]3at is ful of mi^t 
Be into erj^e yli3t, 

And have ynomen kind of man, 

And ba]?ed in Jie flom Jordan; 5 

pan schal Adam and Eve his wiif 
Be anoint wijj oyle of liif, 

And alle pg pat after hem comen 
pat have cristendom® ynomen. 

G9 tel Adam pi fader ]?is, 10 

pat ngn oper grace per nis ; 

And to graype him bid him hy^e 
His terme nei^ep pat he schal dye. 

And when pe bodi pat hap don sinne, 

And pe soule schal par ten atwinne, 15 

Ri^t whan pat time schal be, 

Miche mervayl ^e schullen yse. 

Sg seyp* mi Lprd pat alle hap wroujt, 

And biddep pat ^e ne drede nou^t, 

For nou^t pat ^e schul here ne se ; 20 

S9 he sent 30U word bi me.' 

Eve and Sep her waye nome, 

And went a5ain® as pai come, 

And t9ld Adam pe tiding 

pat him sent pe Hevenking; 25 

And Adam held np bppe his hpnd, 

And ponked God of alle his S9nd. 

Adam his ei5en unfeld. 

And seppen his sone he biheM 

And seyd, 'Merci, swfte Jesus®, 30 

Who hap wounded mi sone pus?' 

‘Bi God, Adam,' quap Eve, 

‘He pat is about to greve 

^ term. * ciristendom. ® * seyt. ^ o^ain. ® Ihus, as usual. 

F 



66 


7, THE MlDLAm DIALECT 


Oure soules bQj^e ni^t and day, 

As michel as ever he may, 
pat is pe fende, pat is our 
pat hap ous brou3t into pis wo. 

He com and mette^ wip ous tway « 

As we jeden in pe way, 

And went toward Paradys ; 
pus lie bgt him in pe viisd 
‘Q wf, Eve,’ quap Adam pg, 

‘ pdu hast ywrou^t michel wq 1 lo 

Alle pat afier ous be bgre, 

Alle schal curssen ous perf9re; 

And alle pat after ous liven, 

Bgpe a morwe and eke an even, 

Schul be bisy to bfre pe wg 15 

pat is y wakened of bus two. 

perfpre, Eve, telle alle pine childer 

B^pe pe 5onger and pe elder, 

pat pai be filed of bur sinne, 

And bid hem fch gn^ biginne 20 

Ni^t and day mere! to crie. 

Ml lime is comen, schal dye.' 

pus Adam bad Eve his wiif 
Tfchen his childer after his liif, 

Hbu pai schuld angn beginne 25 

To crlen.merci for her sinne. 

And pg he hadde ytaujt hem pus, 

As pe bbke tellep bus. 

He kneled adbun in his bfde, 

And dyed angn in pat stfde. 30 

And as pe angel hadde yseyd, 

Alle pe li^tnisse was yleyd*; 

1 mett ® icUon. ® y. ^ aleyd. 



^DAM AND EVE 


67 


^ sex. 


Sonne and mone lorn her Iht 
Sexe ^ days and sexe ^ ni^t. 

Eve bigan to wepe and crTe, 
pQ sche® sey^e Adam dye; 

And Sep made reweli mgn, 5 

And fel doun on his fader angn, 

And as it tellep in pe hok® 

In his armes his fader he tok. 

And ful bitteriiche he wepe. 

And God Almi3tl perof toke kepe, 10 

And sent adoun an angel bri3t 
pat seyd to Sep angn ri3t, 

‘Arise and lete pi sorwe be, 

And wip pine ey3en pou schalt se 

God, pat al pe warld schal glade, 15 

What he wil do wip pat he made.* 

God pat sit in heven hey5e 
Tok Adam sonle, pat Sep it sei3e. 

And bitok it Seynt“* Mi3hel, 

And seyd : ^ Have, loke pis soule wel, 20 

And put it in sorwe and pestemisse. 

Out of joie® and alle li3tnisse. 

Til five pousend winter ben agg. 

Two hundred and ei3te and twenti mg, 

Frg pe time pat he ete 25 

Of pat appel him pou3t sg swete. 

Sg Ignge ® for his gilt. 

In his ward he schal be pilt, 
pat inaked him min hfste^ br^ke; 

Sg Ignge ich wil ben awrfke 30 

On him and alle his blod eke, 

Ml comandment for he breke. 

* he. ^ boke. * seyn. ® ioie, as always. 

® long, as often. ^ best 
F 2 



68 


7. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


And whan j^at terme is agg, 

To joie schal turn al his wg; 

And afterward ]5an schal he 
Bitten in ]:ilke selve se 

pat Li^tbern sat, min angel bri3t, 5 

{r pride was in his hert ali^t/ 
pus seyd Jesus pat sitt an hey^e, 

And seppen into heven he stei3e. 

Fram pe time pat cas fel 

pat curssed Kaim SI0U3 Abel, 10 

Til Adam dyed upon mold, 

As swete Jesus Crist it^ wold, 
gete lay Abel above erpe ; 

Til Jesus Crist, — herd mot he werpe — 

Bad his angels pat pai scholde 15 

Biry pe bodis under molde. 

pe angels al wipouten chfst 
Dede angn Codes hfst 
Into ® cippes pe bodi pai feld ; 

Eve and hir children stode and biheld 20 

Ri3t in pilke selve stfde. 

And hadde wonder what pai dede, 

For pai ne hadde ar pan 
Never sen biry n9 man. 

pan seyd an angel per he stode, 25 

To Eve and to al hir brode: 

^Take 5eme how we do, 

And her afterward do so. 

Biriep alle sg pat dyen 

As 3e se wip 30ure y^en®; 30 

pat we don pis bodis here, 

Dop 3e in pe selve manere.’ 

^ it, not in MS. * ito. ® 5our eyjen. 



ADAM AND EVE 


pQ pe angels had seyd pus 
pai wenten 05ain to swete Jesus, 

To heven per pai fornaast were, 

And Ifved Eve and hir children pere. 

Sex days after Adam was dfde, 
God Almi^ti an angel bfde 
G9 tellen Eve, Adames wiif, 
pe terme was comen of hir iiif. 

p9 Eve wist sche schulde^ dye, 
Sche clfped forp hir progeme, 

Bppe pe- jonger and pe eldre, 

Hir childer and hir childer childre, 
And sayd pat alle mitten here : 

' p9 ich and Adam, mi fere, 

Breken Codes comandement 
Anpn his wr^pe ® was ysent 
On ous and on our progenIe ; 

And perfgre mere! schul crie, 

And bppe bi day and eke bi ni^t 
Dop penance bi al 50ur mi3t. 

And pou, Sep, for ani ping 
Ich comand pe on mi biisceing 
pat pi fader liif be write, 

And min alsp, even smite, . 

Fr9 pe bigining of his liif . 

pat he was maked, and ich his wiif, 

And hdu we were filed wdp sinne, 

And what sorwe we^ han lived inne, 

Ai^ in w’hiche maner pat pou seye 

Rfdiliche wip pine e^^e 

pi fader soule td pine sent. 

For he brak Codes comandement 


schnld. 


® comandment- 


” wretj)e. 



/. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


Alle \>is loke J)at f>ou write 
As wele as J?ou kanst it dite, 
pat ]}g pat be now 5ong childre 
Mai it see, and her elder. 

And oper pat hereafter be bgre, 

Hou we han wrou3t here bifgre, 
pat pai mowe taken ensaumple of ous. 
And amenden a5ain' Jesus.’ 

p9 Eve hadde pus yseyd. 

And hir erand on Sep yleyd, 

Sche kneled adoun and bad hir bfde; 
And ri3t in pilke selve sifde, 
pat alle hir kin stoden and sey3e 
Where, sche dyed bifom her 0730. 

Angn ri3t as Eve was dfde, 

Her children token hem to rede, 

And beren hir pilke selve day 
Unto pe stfde per Adam lay, 

And birled hir in pilke stfde, 

Ri3t as pe angels dede 
pat biricd Adam and Abel; 
perof pai token hede ful wel. 

And p9 sche was in erpe ybrou3t, 
pai were sfri in her pou3t, 

And wopen and made miche w§. 
p9 Adam and Eve was agf, 

Bfpe an even and a morwe 
pai wopen and made miche sorwe. 

And at pe foure* dayes ende, 

Jesu® made an angel wende, 

And seyd per pai wepen sgre: 

‘ Dolep sex days and na mgre ; 


^ ojain. 


^ four. 


=» Ihu, 



ADAM AND EVE 


It 


pe seven day rest of ^oure^ sorwe, 

BgJ^e an even, and a morwe. 

For God ]?at alle pe warld hap vToujt, 

And alle pe warld made of nou5t, 

As him pou^t it wold® be best, 5 

pe seven day he toke rest. 

And anoper ping witterly. 

It bilgknep pe day of mere!; 
pe seven day was Sonenday % 

And pat day schal be ddmesday, 10 

And alle pe soules pat weie have wrou^t 
pat day schul to rest be bron3t/ 
p9* pe angel hadde his erand seyd 
pat God Almi3ti ® ,hadde on him leyd, 

Into heven pe way he nam, — 15 

pai wist bicara. 

Sep an§n ri^t bigan 

Of Adam pat was pe forme man, ’ 

Al togider he wrQt his liif, 

As Eve hade beden, Adames wiif, 20 

As tellep pe boke pat wele wgt, 

In stgn alle pe letters he wr^t. 

For fir ne water opon mold 
Never greven it ne schold. 

p9 Sep hadde writen Adames liif, 25 

And Eves pat was Adames wiif, 

Ri^t in pilke selve stfde 

per Adam was won to bide his bfde, 

Infpiike stfde pe bok he leyd, 

'^"As wise men fr pis han seyd*, 30 

per Adam was won to biden his bfde, 

And Ifved it in pilke stfde; 

^ $onr, * wald. ® semonday. * to. ® al mitten. 

* ys^d. 



/. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


And ]?er it lay alle Noes flode, 

And ne haddc nou^t hot gode. 

L^ng after Noes ^ flod was g 9 , 

Sabmdn J:e king com \q 
pat was heir ® of David Ignd ; 

And Adames liif per he f^nd, 

And al in sign wrilen it was, 

And damaged® ngn letter per nas. 

For alle pat Salamon coupe 
pink in hert or sp|ke wip moupe, 

Qn word he ne coupe wite. 

Of alle pat ever was per write, 

He ne coupe g word understand 
pat Sep hadde writen wip his hgnd. 

And Salamon pat was wiis 
Bi 50 U 3 t pe King of Paradys, 
pat he schulde^ for his mi3t 
Sende him grace fram heven li5t, 
pat he mi3t have grace to wite 
What ping weren pere ywrite. 

God — ^yblisced mot he werpe — 

He sent an angel into erpe 
pat tau3t Salamon ever! smite, 

Alle Adames liif ywrite, 

And seyd to Salamon ywis: 

‘Here, per pis writeing is, 

Ri5t in pis selve stfde, 

Adam was wont to bid his bfdc. 

And here pou schalt a temple wirche 
pat schal be elfped hgll chirche, 
per men schal bid hplj b|de 
As Adam dede in pis stfde/ 

^ nes. ® air. ^ ^amaghed. schuld. 



ADAM AND EVE 


73 


^ first. 

6 


And Salamon )?e king angn 
Lete rfren a temple of lime and stgn^ 
pe firste* chirche under sonne 
pat ever in warlde® was bigonne. 

Nuw have herd of Adames liif, 5 

And of Eve pat was his wiif, 

Whiche liif pai ladden here on m51d, 

And seppen diden as God wold. 

And fg Adam in erpe was dfd. 

For sinne pat com of her sed, lo 

God sent Noes fiod 

And adrenched al pe br5d^; 

Swiche'* wreche God ynam® 

Of alle pat of Adam cam, 

Save Nde ® and his wiif 1 5 

pat God hadde graunted liif, 

And his children pat he hadde 
To schip wip him pat he ladde. 

Of Noe seppen and of his childer 
We bep yeomen al togider. 20 

And seppen pai lived in swiche sinne 
pat for pe liif pai liveden inne 
Sodom and Gomore, pat wer pg 
Swipe npble cites twg, 

Bgpe sonken into helle, 25 

As we here clerkes telle. 

And andper npble cite, 
pat %vas yhgten Ninive, 

Was in pilke selve cas; 

Bot as pe prophete Jpnas 30 

Bad for hem bi^ day and ni^t, 

To swete Jesu ful of n3i3t, 

® warld. ’ blod. * swich. ^ neon, 

noee, as in 1 . 19, leved. * bi, not in MS. 



L THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


And made bQj>e king and quene, 

And alle J^at d]?er pople bidene, 

In her bedes he made hem wake, 

And hard penaunce he dede hem take. 
And |?9 ]?ai were to penaunce pilt 
God forjaf hem here ^ gilt ; 
pus Ninive saved was 
purch bisekeing of Jonas. 

5ete after Noes fiod, 

A1 pat com of Noes ^ blod, — 

Were® he never sq hgly man,— 

For pe sinne pat Adam bigan, 
per most ngn in heven com, 

5r God hadde his conseyl nome 
To lijten in pe virgine ]\Iarie, 

And on pe rode wolde^ dye, 

For to biggen oils alle fre, — 

Yherd and heyed mot he be. 

Now have ;e herd of swete Jesus, 

As pe boke® tellep ous; 

Of pe warld hou it bigan, 

And hou he made of molde ® man. 

Jesu pat was nomen wip wrgng, 

And pgled mam paines strpng 
Among pe Jewes pat were felle, 

To bring Adam out of helle, 

5if ous grace for, to winne 
pe joie pat Adam now is inne. 

® noees. ® weren. * wald. ® bok. 



HAVEL OK THE DANE 


75 


VL HAVELOK THE DANE 

In ]3at time, sg it bifelle, 

Was in })e l§nd ^ of Denemark 
A riche king, and swy}?e stark; 
pe^ name of him was Birkabeyn. 

He havede rnani knict and sweyn ; 5 

He was fayer® man, and wicht^, 

Of bodi he was f:e beste knicht \ 
pat evere micte Ifden ut ® hfre, 

Or stede on*^ ride, or handlen spfre. 

pre children he havede bi his wif, :o 

He hem lovede s§ his lif; 

He havede a sone and® douhtres tw§, 

Swi^^ fayre, as fel it s§. 

He j^at wile npn forbfre, 

Riche ne povre, king ne kaysfre, 15 

Dfth him Idk ]?an he best wilde ® 

Liven; but hyse dayes were filde^^ 
pat he ne moucte np mpre live 
For gold^^ ne silver, ne for r.p gyve. 

Hwan he "pzt y^iste. Tape he sende 30 

After prestes fe^nd“ hende, 

Chandunes gode and monkes bppe, 

Him for to wisse and to rpSe^®; 

Him for to hoslen, and to^'‘ shrive, 

Hwil his bodI were on live. 25 

Hwan he was hosled and shriven, 

His quiste maked and for him gyven, 

^ Ion. * * fayr. * wicth. * knicth, as often. 

® nth. ^ onne. * and, not in MS. * bes wolde. - fnlde. 
gol. “ an, as occasionally. rede. hoslon an forto. 



76 


/. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


Hise knictes dede he alle site, 

For ]7oru hem he wolde witc 
Hwo mictc ycme hise children yunge, 

Til Jjat he kou}3en spfken wi]?' tunge; 

Spoken and gangen, on horse riden, 5 

Knictes and - sweynes bi here sTden. 

He sppken ]x*roffe, and chpsen s 5 ne 
A riche man J?at® under mone 
Was Ipe trcwcst ]?at he wende, 

Godard, })c kinges oune frende; 10 

And sejden he mouchte^ hem best loke, 

Yif pat he hem undertoke. 

Til hise sone mouhte® bfre 
Helm on hfved, and Ifden ut hfre, 

In his hand a spfre stark, 15 

And king ben maked of Denemark. 

He wel trowede pat he seyde, 

And on Godard handes leyde, 

And seyde, * Here bitfche I pe 

Mine children alle J>re, 20 

A 1 Denemark and al mi fe. 

Til pat ml sone of elde* be. 

But }3at ich wille, j^at ]?ou^ swfre 
On auter and on messegfre, 

On Jje belles f>at men ringes, 25 

On messebok pe prest on singes, 
pat pou mine children shalt weP yeme, 
pat here® kin bS ful wel queme. 

Til mi sone mowe ben knicht*®, 

panne bitfche him pg his richt^\ 30 

Denemark and pat pertil Ipnges, 

Casteles and tunes, wodes and wgnges/ 

* wit * an, as occaaonally. ’ was. * moucthe. ® naoathe, as often. 

* belde. ^ po, * we. ® hire. ^ knictL “ ricth, 



HAVELOK THE DANE 


77 


Godard stirt up, and^ sw5r al |?at 
pe king him bad, and sij^en sat 
Bl the knictes pat per ware, 
pat wepen alle swipe sare 
For pe king pat deide sone. 

Jesu® Crist pat maked mone 
On pe mirke niht® to shine, 

Wile his soule frp hellepme, 

And Ifve pat it mote wone 
In hevenerlche with Codes sone. 

Hwan Birkabeyn was leyd in grave, 
pe erl dede sone take pe knave, 

Havelok, pat was pe heir^, 

Swanborow his sister, Helfled pe toper. 
And in pe castel dede he hem d5, 
per ngn ne micte hem comen to 
Of here kyn, per pei sperd wgre®. 
per he greten ofte spre, 

Bppe for hunger and for kgld, 

Qr he weren pre winter §ld®. 

Feblellke he gaf hem clppes, — 

He ne yaf a note of hise 9 pes; 

Fie hem clppede riht'^, ne fedde, 

Ne hem ne dede richelike bedde®. 
panne Godard was sikerlike 
Under God pe mgste swike 
pat evre in erpe shaped was, 

Withuten gn, pe wike Judas. 

Flave he pe malisun today 
Of alle pat evre spfken may I 
Of patriark, and of pppe. 

And of prest with loken cgpe; 

^ an. ^ lim, as always. * nith. * eir. ® were, 

^ rith, as often. ® bebedde. 


lo 


15 


20 


25 


30 


« hold. 



78 


/. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


Of monekes and hermites b9]?e, 

And of }?e leve hylT rode 

pat God himselve ran on blodel 

Crist warie him with his mouth; 

WarL'd worpe^ he of norp and suth, 5 

OfTe alle men ** pat spfken kunne, 

Of Crist pat maked® mone and sunne! 

panne he havede of al pe Ipnd 
Al pe folk tilled intil his hgnd, 

And alle haveden sworn ® him gth, 10 

Riche and povre, lef and Iplh, 
pat he sholden hise wille frfme, 

And pat he shulden him nouht^ grfme. 

He pouhte® a ful strgng trfchery, 

A trayson and a felony, *5 

Of pe children for to make, — 
pe devel of helle him sone take! 

Hwan pat was pouht®, onpn he ferde 

To pe tour per he wpren sperde, 

per he greten for hunger and cgld. 20 

pe knave, pat was sumdfl b§ld, 

Kam him ageyn, on knes him sette, 

And Godard ful feyre he per grette. 

And Godard seyde, 'Wat is yu? 

HwT grete ye and goulen nou?' 25 

‘For us hungreth swipe sgre,' 

Seyden he wiputen’’^ mgre; 

‘ We ne have to fte®, we ne have 

Herinne neyther kniht ® ne knave 

pat yeveth us drinken, ne ng mgte 30 

Hal van d|I pat we moun fte. 

\Vg is us pat we weren born I 

i-wrj>e. man. ^ maude. * sworen. * nonth, as often* 

* J)outhie. ® houth. ^ wolden. ® liete ne. • knith* 



HAVELOK THE DANE 


79 


Weilawei, nis it ng corn 
pat men micte maken of brfd? 

Us^ hungreth, we aren ney dfd/ 

Godard herde here \va, — 

TherofFe yaf he nouht ^ a stra, — 5 

But tok pe maydnes bQthe samen, 

Al sg it were upon his® gamen, 

A1 SQ he wolde with hem leyke, 
pat weren for hunger grene and bleike. 

Of bgl^en he karf on two here prptes, lo 

And sipen karf^ hem al lo grptes. 
per was sorwe, wosg it sawe, 

Hwan pe children bi pe ° wawe 
Leyen and sprauleden in pe bl^. 

Havelok it saw, and })er® bi stod: 15 

Ful sprT was pat sell knave, 

Mikel dred he mouhte^ have, 

For at hise herte he saw a knif 
For to rfven him hise lyf. 

But pe knave ^ pat Iltel^ was, 20 

He knelede bifgr pat Judas, 

And seyde, ^LQverd, mere! noul 
Manrede, Ipverd, bidde 1® you; 

Al Denemark I wile you yive’®, 

To pat forward pu late me live. 25 

Here 1*^ wile on boke sw^re 
pat nevre mgre ne shal 1 bfre 
Ayen pe, Igverd, sheld"*® ne spfre, 

Ne oper wepne*® that may you dgre. 

Lgverd, have merci of me ; 50 

Today I wile frg Denemark fie, 

Ne nevere mgre comen ageyn. 


1 


|)s. ® notitTi. * 

* kave. * biddi. 


biis. 

10 


* karf, not in MS. ® J>. 
yeve. hL sbel. 


* ye. ^ naouthe. 
wepne here. 



So 


L THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


^ bircabein. 
him nouth. 
drench. 


Sw^ren I \vole J^at Biikabeyn ^ 

Nevere yete me ne gat.' 

Hwan })e devel herde * ]?at 
Sumdfl bigan him for to re we, 

Withdrew f>e knif Jjat was lewe 
Of f>e sell children blod. 
per was miiacle fair and god, 
pat he \}Q knave nouht ne slou, 

But for rewnesse him wipdrow®. 

Of Havelok * rewede him ful sgre, 

And j^oucte he wolde pat he dfd wgre, 
Buten® pat he nouht wip® his hend 
Ne drfpe him^, pat fule fend; 
poucle he, als he him bl stod 
Starinde alsQ ® he were wod, 

‘ Yif I ® late him lives g9 
He micte me wirchen michel wg; 

Grith ne get I® nevere mg. 

He may me*® waken for to sl§. 

And if*^ he were brouct of live, 

And mine children wolden thrive, 

Lpverdinges after me 

Of al Denemark micten he be. 

God it wite, he shal ben dfd, 

Wile 1 taken ngn oper r§d; 

I shal do casten him in pe se*^ 
per I wile pat he drenched be ; 

Abouten his hals an anker god, 
pat he ne flete in pe fl^d/ 
per angn he dede sende 
After a fishfre pat he w^ende 
pat wolde al his wille do, 

* hede ® witdrow. * avelok. ® but on. 
* als. * y. ^ me, not in MS. yf* 


5 


lo 


15 


20 


25 


30 


* wit. 
^ she. 



}JAVELGK THE DANE 


8l 


And sone angn he seyde him to, 

‘ Grim, )5ou ^v9st }>u art ml J>ral ; 

Wilt don ml Aville al 
pat I wile bidden pe, 

Tomorwen shal maken pe fre, 5 

And aucte pe yeven and riche make. 

With pan pu wilt pis child take. 

And Ifden him with pe tonicht, — 
pan pou sest pe moneliht^, — 

Into pe s| and don him prinne lo 

Al wile 1 taken* on me pe sinne/ 

Grim tok pe child and bpnd him faste 
Hwil pe bgndes micte laste, 
pat weren of ful strange ® line. 
pg was Havelok in ful string pine ; 15 

Wiste he nevere wat was wg. 

Jesu Crist, pat makede to gg 
pe halte, and pe doumbe spfke®, 

Havelok, pe of Godard wr|ke*. 

Hwan Grim him havede faste bounden, 20 

And sipen in an pld clgth wounden^®, 

A kevel of elutes, ful unwraste, 
pat he mouhte’^ spfke ne fnaste 
Hwere he wolde him bfre or Ifde, — 

Hwan he havede don pat dede, 25 

Hwan pe swike him havede bede^® 
pat he shulde him forth Ifde^* 

And him drenchen ” in pe se, — 
pat forwarde makeden ht%— 

In a ppke, ful and blac, 30 

Sdne he caste him on his bac, 

^ wilte. ® I, not in MS. ® se mone lith. * J>erinne. * wile 
taken. * strong. ^ her. ® speken* * wreken. vnHlen. 

mouthe. he J>ede. ” lede, not in MS. ’ ‘ drinchen. 

a 



82 


/. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


And bar him hgm to hise clfve; 

And bitaucte him Dame Lfve, 

And seyde, ‘ Wite Jjou fjis knave, 

AI sg thou with me' hf have. 

I shal dreinchen him in se; 5 

For him shole we ben maked fre, 

Gold haven ynou and oper fe ; 

J)at have]?^ ml l^verd bihgten me.^ 

Hwan Dame Lfve^'^ herde Jjat, * 

Up she stirte and nouht^ ne sat, lo 

And caste pe knaVe so harde addun® 
pat he per crakede hise croune® 

Ageyn a grft stgn, per it lay; 

pg Havelok micte sei, ‘ Weilawei, 

pat evere was 1 kinges bfrn I ’ 15 

pat him ne havcde grip or frn, 

Ledun or wulf, wulvine'^ or b|re. 

Or oper b§st pat wolde him dfrc. 

Sg lay pat child to middelnicht 

pat Grim bad Lfve bringen lict, 20 

For Id don on hise ^ clppes : 

* Ne ihenkest u nowt of mine ppes 
, pat ich have mi Ipverd swpren? 

Ne wile I nouht be foriQren; 

I shal bfren him to pe se, 25 

pdu wgst pat it bihdves'' me, 

And I shal drenchen him perinne; 

Ris up swipe and gp pu binne, 

And blou ]:e fir and liht'- a kandeh’ 

Als she shulde hise clppes handel 30 

On for to don, and blawc pe^® fir, 

^ mi. - havet. * bgve, not in MS. ^ nouth. ® adoun 

so harde. . ® hise croune he ])er crakede. ’ wlf wlvine. ® nicth. 

® his. thenkeste. jathoves. lith, as often. ” J)er. 



HAVEL OK THE DANE 


83 


She saw J^erinne a liht ful shir, 

A 1 SQ briht^ it were da}^ 

Aboute pe knave per he lay. 

Of hise mouth it stod a st^m, 

Als it were a sunnebfm; 5 

A 1 sg liht was it f>erinne, 

Sg f>er brenden cerges inne. 

‘ Jesu Crist ! ’ quat ® Dame Lfve, 

‘ Hwat is p 3 ,t liht in lire clfve. 

Ris*'’ up Grim and loke wat it mfnes, zo 

Hwat is pe liht^ as }3ou ivenes?' 

He stirten bgj^e up to the knave, — 

For man shai god wille have, — 

Unkeveleden him and swlj>e unbounden, 

And sone angn upon® him f unden, 15 

Als he tirneden of his serk, 

On his riht® shuldre a kynemerk, 

A swl]?e briht\ a swl]?e fair. 

*Godd gt/ quath Grim, ‘J^is is"^ ure dr 

pat shal ben ® Igverd of Denemark ; 20 

He shal ben king strgng and stark. 

He shal haven in his hand 
AD Denemark and Engeland. 

He shal do Godard ful 

He shal him hangen or quik flp *, 25 

Or he shal him al quic grave, 

Of him shal he ng merci have/ 
pus seide Grim and sgre gret. 

And sone iel him to pe fet, 

And seide, ‘Lgverd, have mere! 30 

Of me, and Lgve pat is me bl! 

Lgverd we aren bgpe pine, 
pine cherles, pine hine. 

^ brith. * wat. * sir. * litb. ® upon, not in MS. * ritfa. 
» ^ is, not in MS. ® ben, not in MS. * a. 

G 2 



84 


/. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


Lpverd, we sholen J>e wel fede, 

Til ]?at pn cone riden on stede, 

Til J)at }3U cone ful wel bfre 
Helm on h^ved, sheld and spfre; 

Ne^ shal nevere wite sikerlike, 5 

Godard, )3at fule swike. 

poru opcr man, l^verd, than })oru pB 

Shal ^ I nevere freman be. 

pdu shalt me, I^verd, fre maken, 

For I shal yemen pB and waken; lo 

J)oru pB wile I fredom have/ 
pg was Havelok a blrj?e knave; 

He sat him up and cravede brfd, 

And seide, *Ich am neye® dfd, 

Hwat for hunger, wat for bpndes 15 

pat pu. leidest on mm hgndes, 

And for pe* kevel at pB laste, 
pat in mi mouth was priste® faste; 

I® was perwith^ sp harde prangled 
pat I was perwith neye® strangled/ 20 

'Wel is me pat pu mayht® fte; 

Godd quath Lfve, shal pe f|te. 

Brfd and chese, butere and milk, 

Pastees and flaunes, al with swilk 

Shole we sone pe wel fede, 25 

Lgverd, in pis mikel nede; 

Soth it is pat men seyth*® and swfreth, 
per God wile helpen, nouht’^ ne dfreth/ 
panne she*® havede brouht*® pe mfte, 

Havelok anpn bigan to fte 30 

Grundlfke, and was ful blipe; 

Coupe he nouht ** his hunger m!pe. 

^ he ne. ® sal. ^ ney. * J)e, not in MS. ® frist. ® y. 

* |)ewiih, as in next line. * mayth hete. ® goddoth. seyt. 

** noutli. sho. ** brouth- 



HAVELOK THE DANE 


85 


A Igf he et\ I wgt®, and mQre, 

For him hungrede swij?e sgre. 
pre dayes Jjer biforn, I wene, 

Et he ng mgte, pat was wel sene. 

Hwan he havede ften and was fed, 5 

Grim dede maken a ful fayr bed; 

Unclgpede him and dede him perinne, 

And seyde, ' Slep, sone, with michel winne, 

Slep wS faste and dred pe nouht®, 

Frg sorwe to joye art pu brouhtV 10 

Sone sg it was liht® of day, 

Grim it undertok pe wey 
To pe wicke traitour Godard, 
pat was Denemarkes® stiward, 

And seyde, ‘Lgverd, don ich have 15 

pat pou me bfde of pe knave ; 

He is drenched in pe fiod, 

Abouten his hals an anker god. 

He is witerlike dfd, 

Jteth he nevre mgre brfd; 20 

He lip drenched in pe se: — 

Yif me gold and"^ oper fe, 
pat I® mowe riche be. 

And with pi chartre make me® fre, 

For pu ful wel bihet it^® me 25 

panne I laste^^ spak with pe.' 

Godard st 5 d, and lokede on him 
porutlike^® with eyne grim, 

And seyde, ^Wilt u nou^® ben erl? 

Gg hgm swipe, fule dritcherl; 30 

Gg hfpen and be everemgre 
pral and cherl, as pou f r wgre ; 

^ het ® y woth. ® nonth, * brouth. * lith. ® denemak a. 
^ and, not in MS. ® y. * me, not in MS. bihetot. last 

Jjornthlike. non, not in MS. 



86 


I. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


1 shal have. 
® he him. 

» neth. 

^ct. 


Shalt u have * ngn oper mede. 

For litel 1 shal® do J?e Ifde 
To f>e galwes, sg God me rede, 

For ])(Ju haves don a ^vicke dede, 

pou maiht® st§nden her to Ignge, 5 

Bute fjou swij^e hfpen^ gQnge.' 

Grim thoucte to late j“at he ran 
Fr9 Ipat traytour, wicke man, 

And }?oucte, ^Wat shal me to rgj^e*'^? 

Wite him® onlive, he wile us b^J^e^ lo 

Ileye hangen on gahvetre. 

Betere us is of Ignde to fle, 

And berwen b9j>en ure lives, 

Mine® children and mine wives.' 

Grim sgide sone al his corn, 15 

Shep wi|?*^ wolle, nft^® wip® horn, 

Hors and swin, and ggt” \vij> bfrd, 
pe gees, pe hennes of pe yfrd, — 

Al he splde pat ouht douhte^^ 

pat he evre selle moucte, 20 

And al he to pe pen! drou. 

Hise ship he greypede wel inow; 

He dede it tfre and^^ ful wel pike 

pat it ne doutede sgnd ne krike; 

perinne dide a ful god mast, 25 

Strpnge cables and ful fast, 

Qres gode, and ful god seyl; 
perinne wantede nouht^^ a nayl 
pat evere he sholde perinne do. 

Hwan he haved it^^ greyped so, 30 

Havelok pe yunge he dide perinne, 

^ shal, notin MS. ^ mait. ^ ejwjn. ]>iL. ® rede. 

’’ wile be]je. ® and mine, * wit, as in next line, 

and got, not in MS, outh douthe. an. nouth. 



HAVELOK THE DANE 


87 


Him and his ^v^f, hise sones f»rinne, 
And hise t^vo doutres ]?at faire W9re ; 
And sone dede he leyn in an gre, 

And drou him to heye se, 
pere he miht alperbeste^ fie. 

Frg Ignde wgren he bote a mTIe, 

Ne were nevere but ane hwile, 
pat it ne gan ' a wind to rise 
Out of pe north men calleth bTse, 

And dr^f hem intil Engelgnd, 
pat al was sipen in his h^nd, 

His, pat Havelok was pe name; 

But gr he havede michel shame, 

Michel sorwe and michel tene ; 

And sipe® he gat it al bidene, 

Als ye shulen nou forthwar ifre-, 

If® that ye wilen perto here. 

In Humber Grim bigan to lende, 

In Lindeseye riht® at pe north ende; 
per sat his’’’ ship upon pe spnd, 

But Grim it drou up to pe Ignd. 

And pere he made a litel cpte 
To him and to al® hise flgte; 

Bigan he pere for to frde®, 

A lltel hus to maken of erpe, 

Sg pat he wel ppre were 
Of here herboru herborwed pere: 

And for pat Grim pat place auhte^®, 
pe stfde of Grim pe name lauhte ; 
Sg pat Grimesbi it calle 
pat perofFe spfken alie. 

And sg shulen men callen it ay 
Bitwene pis and domesday. 

^ mith aljierbest, ® bigan. ® }»rie. * here. ® yf. 

* al, not in MS. ^ er]?e. ante. lanle. it, not in MS. 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


* *rith* ^ is. 
calleth alle. 



88 


/. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


m. ROBERT lAIANNIXG^S HANDLYNGE SYNNE 
THE TALE OF PERS THE USURER 

OkerErs and kauersyns, 

As wykked pcy are as Sarasyns. 

Wh6s9 myjt preve \vhych j^ey wgre, 

Were ]?ey lewed or were ]?ey Ipre, 

pey shulde nat come in^ Crystys herde, 5 

Ne come in cherche ne chyrche5frde. 

Nppelfs, purgh pys skylle 

pey mowe be saved, ^yf pat pey wylle 

Lfve pat synne and do ng more. 

And do at hgly cherches Ipre; 10 

And 5yve ajeyn pat yche pyng 
pat pey have take in okeryng ; 

5yf pey mow nat ajen hyt ^yve, 

Heipe pe pore men per^vyp^* to lyve 

Largely and wyp gode wylle, 15 

And pey mowe peyse here dedys ylle. 

A gode ensample mow 50 here, 

Of Pers pat was a lollere; 

And I® shal telle 50W as quyk 

How he was bppe gode and wyk. so 

Seynt Jpne® pe aumenere 

Seyp Pers was an dkerere. 

And was swype covey tons. 

And a nygun and avarous. 

And gadred penes'* unto stgre S5 

As okereres® done®®’ aywhpre* 

^ yn, as always. |?erwt, as always- ® y> as always, ^ lone. 

< peas, ® okerers. dou. 



ROBERT manning's HANDLYNGE SYNNE 


89 


Befyl hyt sg upon a day 
pat pore men sate in pe way. 

And spred here hatren on here barme 
A^ens pe sonne pat was warme. 

And rekened pe custome houses fch gne ^ 5 

At whych pey had gode, and at whyche npne®; 
pere pey hadde gode pey preysed weyl. 

And pere pey hadde noght, never a deyl. 

As pey spak of manywhat. 

Come Pers forp in pat gat; lo 

pan seyd fch gne pat sate and stode, 

" Here comp Pers pat never dyd gode.’ 

5ch pne seyd to oper jangland, 
pey toke never gode at Pers hand ; 

Ne npne p5re men never shal have, 15 

Coude he never s§ weyl crave. 

One of hem began to sey, 

^ A wajour * dar I wyp ley 
pat I shal have sum gode at hym. 

Be he never sg gryl ne grym/ 20 

To pat wajour pey graunted alle. 

To 5yve hym a jyfc, 5yf sg my^t befalie. 

pys man upsterte and toke pe gate 
Tyl he com at Pers jate. 

As he stode stylle and bpde pe qufde, 23 

Qne com wyp * an asse charged wyp brf de ; 
pat yche brfde Pers had boght. 

And to hys hous shuld hyt be broght. 
pg he sagh Pers come per wypal*, 
pe pore poght, now aske 1 shal: 50 

^ 1 aske pe sum gode pur chary te, 

Pers, 5yf py wylle * be/ 

regularly. 2 noun, as always. ® waiour, as in 1 . 31, ^ wt, 

So also in compounds. ^ wtalle. ® wyk 



90 


7 . THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


^ felaws. 


Pers stode and loked on hym 
Felunlyche wy}? yjen grym. 

He slduped do^n to seke a stpne, 

But, as hap was, J)an fpnde he npne. 

For ])Q stpne he toke a Igfe, 5 

And at J?e pore man hyt drgfc. 

pe pore man hente hyt up belyvc. 

And was ]>erof ful ferly blype. 

To hys felawcs^ faste he ran 

Wip pe Ipfe, pys pore man. lo 

^ Lg/ he seyde % ' what I have 
Of Pers 3yft, sp God me save.' 

' Nay,’ pey swore by here pryft, 

‘ Pers 5ave never swych a 5yft.' 

He seyd, *3e shul weyl undyrstpnde is 

pat I hyt had at Pers hpnde; 
pat dar I sw§re on pe halydom 
Here before 50W fch §n®.' 

Grfte merveyle had pey alle 

pat swych a chaunce myjt hym befalle- 20 

pe pridde daj', — pus wryte hyt is*, — 

Pers fyl in a gr|te syknes; 

And as he laye® in hys bedde, 

Hym poght weyl pat he was ledde 

Wyp pne pat aftyr hym was sent 25 

T 5 come unto hys jugement®. 

Befpre pe Juge’ was he broglit 
To ^elde acounte how he hadde wroght. 

Pers stode ful sgre adrad, 

And was abashed as amad®; 30 

He sagh a fende on pe ig party 
Bewreyj-ng hym ful felunly. 

® seyd. ® ecljone. * ys, as always. * ley. 

® iugement. ^ luge. ® a, not in MS. 



ROBERT manning's HANDLYNGE SYNNE 

Alle hyt was shewed hym befgre 
How he had lyved syn he was b§re, 

And namely every wykked dede 
Syn fyrst he coude hymselve ^ Ifde ; 

Why he hem dyd and for what chfsun. 

Of alle behove]? hym ^elde^ a rfsoun. 

On ]?e idpei ^ party stode men ful bryjt 
pat wulde have saved hym at here my^t, 

But }?ey myght ng gode fynde 

pat my^t hym save or unbynde* 

pe feyre men seyd, ' What is to rede ? 

Of hym fynde we ng gode dede 
pat God is payd of, but of a Igfe 
pe whych Pers at^ pe pore man drgfe. 
gyt 3ave he hyt wyp ng gode wylle. 

But kast hyt after hym wyp ylle; 

For Goddys love jave he hyt no3t, 

Ne for almesdede he hyt had poght 

Ngpelfs, pe pore man 

Had pe Igfe of Pers pan/ 

pe fende had Ieyed“ in balaunce 

Hys wykked dedes and hys myschaunce; 

pey leyd pe Igfe ajens hys dedys, — 

pey had no^t elles, pey mote nedys, — 

pe hgly man tellep us, and seys 

pat pe Igfe made fven peys. 

pan seyd pese .feyre men to Pers, 

^ gyf pou be wys, now pou If res 
How pys Igfe pe helpep at nede 
T5 tylle py soule wyp almesdede/ 

Pers of hys slepe gan bljnke. 

And grftiy on hys drfme gan pynke, 

* a., * leyd* 


^ hymself. 


to jelde. 


toujwr. 



/. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


Syghyng wy}? mornyng chere 
As man J^at was in grfte wfre, 

Hw' J3at he acouped was 
Wy}> fendes ffle for hys trcspas, 

And how J?ey wulde have danipned hym f>ere, 
3yf mercy of Jesu^* Cryst ne were. 

Alle pys in hys herte he least, 

And to hymself he spak at J>e laste, 
pat ' For a Ipfe in f vyi ^ wylle 
Haipe me in sg grfte perel, 

Moche wulde® hyt heipe at nede 
Wyp gode wyl do almesdede/ 

Frf j^at tyme }5an wax Pers 
A man of s§ feyre maners, 
pat n§ man my 3 te® in hym fynde 
But Id pe pore hgpQ meke and kynde; 

A mylder man ne my^t nat be, 

Ne to pe p5re mpre of almes fre, 

And reufui of herte alsp he was 
pat mayst pdu here Ifre in pys pas. 

Pers mette, upon a day, 

A pore man by pe way 
As naked as he was bpre, 
pat in pe s^f.had alle Ipre. 

He come to Pers pere he stode. 

And asked hym sum of hys gdde, 

Sumwhat of hys clpping, 

For pe love of Hevenekyng. 

Pers was of reufui herte, 

He tdke hys kyrtyl of as smert, 

And ded hyt on pe man above, 

And bad hym wfre hyt for hj^s love. 


eveyl. 


Ihu, as always. 


* wide. 


myjt. 



ROBERT MANNING'S HANDLYNGE SYNNE 


pe man hjt t 5 ke and was ful blyj^e ; 

He ^ede and sglde hyt as swjpe. 

Pers stode and dyd behglde 
How pe man pe kyrtyl sgide, 

And was perwyp ferly wrgpe 
pat he sglde so sone hys clgpe. 

He my5t ny lenger for sorow stands 
But 3ede hgme ful sgre gretand, 

And seyd hyt was an fvyl sygne, 

And pat hymselve® was nat dygne 
For to be in hys preyere ; 
perfor nolde he pe kyrtyl wfre. 

Whan he hadde ful Igng grete. 

And a party perof gan ® lete, — 

For comunlych after wepe 
Fal men sone on slepe, — 

As Pers lay in hys slepyng, 

Hym poght a feyre swevenyng, 

Hjto poght he was in hevene ly^t. 

And of God he had a syght 
Syttyng in hys kyrtyl clad, 
pat pe pore man of hym had ; 

And spak to hym ful myldely, 

‘Why wepest pou and art spry? 

Lg Pers/ he seyd, ‘ pys is py clgth ; 

For he sglde hyt, were pou wrgth. 

Know hyt weyl, 3yf pat pou can, 

For me pou jave hyt pe pore man; 
pat pou 3ave hym in chaiyte. 

Every deyl pou jave hyt me/ 

Pers of slepe oute breyde. 

And poght grfte wunder and sepen seyd% 

^ staiide. ® li)'Tnsel£l * be^an^ * seyd. 



94 


/. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


‘Blessyd be alle pore men 
For God Almjjty lovej? hem; 

And \ve}l is hem f>at pure are here, 
pey are wyp God b^pe lefe and dere, 

And I shal fonde by nv5t and day 5 

To be pure, 5yf pat I may/ 

Hastly he loke h}S kateyl 

And jave hyt to pore men fche deyl. 

Pers kalled to hym hys cleik 
pat was hys nptarye, and bad hym herk : — 10 

*I shal pe shewe a pryvyte, 

A pyng pat pdu shalt do to me, 

I wyl pat pou n§ man hyt telle; 

My body 1 take pe here 16 selle 

To sum man as in bondage, 15 

To lyve in povert and in servage; 

But pou do pus I wyl be wrgth, 

And pou and pyne shal be me Ipth. 

5yf pdu do hyt, I shal pe ^yve 
Ten pound ^ of gold wel %vip td lyve; 20 

pg ten pound I take pc here, 

And me 16 selle on bpnde manere, 

I ne recche unto whom, 

But 9nlych he have pe crystendom. 
pe raunsun pat pou shall for me take, 
parfgre pdu shalt ^j^ernes make 
For td 5yve hyt blypely^ and weyl 
T6 pore men every deyl, 

And wyphglde perof n§ pyng 
pe mdunlouns of a ferpyng/ 

Hys clerk was F9<t6 do pat dede, 

But 9n]y for manas and for drede. 


25 


30 


^ pownd, as in next line. 


2 blej>ely. 



ROBERT MANNING'S HANDLYNGE SYNNE 


95 


For drede Pers made hym hyt do\ 

And dede hym plyghte hys trouthe }?erto. 

Whan hys clerk had made hys pthe, 

Pers dede on hym a foule clpthe; 

Unto a cherche bpjpe pey jede 5 

For to fulfylle hys wyl in dede. 

Whan J)at J^ey to pe cherche com, 

' Lgrde/ J^oght pe clerk, ‘ whdm 
My5t 1 fynde, pys yche sele, 

To whom 1 my^ie^ selle Pers wele?’ lo 

pe clerk Idked everywhere, 

And at pe last he knew where 
A ryche man was® pat fr had be 
Specyal knowlych ever betwe. 

But purgh myschaunce at a cas 15 

Alle hys gode ylpre was; 
gole, pus pat man hyghte, 

And knew pe clerk wel be syghte. 
pey spak of plde aqueyntaunce, 

And gole tqlde hym of hys chaunce- 20 

‘ ge,’ seyde pe clerk, ‘ I rede pou bye 
A man lo do py marchaundye, 
pat pou mayst hplde in servage 
To restore weyl pyn dammage/ i ^ 

pan seyd gole, 'On swych chaffare 25 

Wulde I feyn my sylver ware.’ 

pe clerke seyd, ‘Lp, pne here, 

A trew man and * a dubonf re 
pat wyl serve pe t 5 pay 

Pe>meble, al pat he may. $0 

Pers shalt pou calle hys name, 

For hym shalt pou have moche frame. 

^ 71 . 1-6, not in Harleian MS., but supplied from Bodl, MS. 415. ^ niyjt. 

® was, not in MS. * an. ® dubomire. 



96 


I, rim MIDLAND DIALECT 


He is a man ful gracyous 
Code to Wynne unto )>yn hdus, 

And God shal jyve )?e hys blessyng, 

And foysyn in alle fjyng/ 

pe clerk 5avc alle hys raunsuii 5 

To pe p 5 re men of pe toun, — 

Plenerly alle pat he toke 

Wyphtdde he nat a feipyng noke. 

pe emperoiire sent hys messageres 

Alle abdute for to seke Pers, lo 

But pey ne my5te^ never here 

Of ryche Pers, pe tollere, 

In what slfde he was nome, 

Ne® whydyrward he was become; 

Ne pe clerk wuld telle to npne 15 

Whydyrward pat Pers was g^ne. 

Now is Pers bycome bryche, 
pat was bppc stoute and ryche. 

Alle pat ever any man hym bad®, 

Pers dyd hyt wyp herte ^ glad. 20 

He wax sq mylde and sg meke, 

A mylder man purt ng man seke; 

For he meked hymself pverskyle 
Pottes and dysshes for to swyle®. 

To grfte penaunce he gan hym take, 25 

And moche for to fast and wake, 

And moche he loved pglmodnesse 
To ryche, to pore, to mgre, to lesse. 

Of alle men he wuld have doute, 

And to here byddyng mekly loute; 30 

Wulde pey bydde hym sytte or stande. 

Ever he wulde be bowande. 

* my^t ® no, as in next line. * do bad. * hert, ® swele. 



ROBERT MANNING'S IIANDLYNGE SYNNE 


And for h 2 bare hym 59 meke and softe, 
Shrewes mysdede hym ful ofte, 

And helde hym folted or wode 
For he was sg mylde of mode. 

And pey ]5at were hys felawes' 

IMysseyd hym mg^t in here sawes; 

And alle he sufTred here npbreyd, 

And never naght a5ens hem seyd*“. 

gole, hys Igrde, we I undyrstodc 
pat al hys grace and hys gode 
Com hym^ for pe love of Pers, 
pat was of £g hgly maners. 

And whan he wyst of hys bounte, 

He kalled Pers in pryvyie : 

‘ Pers/ he seyd, ‘ pou were wurpy 
For to be wurscheped mgre pan 1 , 

For pdu art weyl wyp Jesu, 

He shewep for pe grf te vcrtu ; 
parfgr I shal make pe fre, 

1 wyl pat my felaw poQ. be** 
parto Pers graunted noght 
To be freman as he besoght; 

Fie wulde be as he was gre 
In pat servage for evermgre. 

He panked pe Igrde myldely 
For hys grfte curteysy. 

Syppen Jesu, purgh hys myjt. 

Shewed hym to Pers sy5t, n.'f* • ^ ^ 

For to be stalworpe in hys fghdyng, 

And to hym have loveigngyng. 

‘ Be nat sorow ful to do penaunce, 

1 am wip pe in every chaunce; 


^ felaus. 


se5»de* 


* hym> not in MS* 



93 


/, THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


Pers, i have mynde of )?e, 

L§ here pe hyrtyl pon ^ 5ave for me, 
pGrfyr guice I shal pe sende 
In allc godenesse ^veyI lo ende/ 

Byfyl pat serjauntes® and squyers 5 

pat were want lo serve Pers 
Went in pylgrymage, as in kas, 

To pat cuntre pere Pers was. 
gole ful feyre gan hem kalle, 

And preyd hem hpme to hys halle. lo 

Pers was pere pat yche sele, 

And everych ^ne he knew hem wele. 

Alle he served hem as a knave 
pat was wunt heie servyse to have. 

But Pers nat ^yt pey knew, 15 

For penaunce chaunged was hys hew^ ; 

Nat forpy pey behelde hym fast, 

And cftyn to hytn here yjen pey kast, 

And seyde ‘ He pat stonte here 

Is lyche to Pers pe * tollere.' 20 

He h}dde hys vysege al pat he my^t 

Out of knowlych of here syjt; 

NgpeJfs pey behelde hym mgre 
And knew hym w'eyl, al pat were p^re, 

And seyd, ‘ goie, is ^one py page ? 25 

A ryche man is in ]y servage; 
pe emperoure bppe fer and nere 
Plap do hym seche pat we fynde here.' 

Pers lestned, and herd hem spfkyng, 

And pat pey had of hym knowyng; 30 

And prywyly awey he nam 
Tyl he to pe porter cam. 

^ Jcyrtyl j)at jwau. * seriauntes. ® seyd, * j)e, not in MS. 



ROBERT MANNING'S HANDEYNGE SYNNE 


99 


p 3 porter had hys speche Igre,' 

And hery^ng alsg, syn he was bpre ; 

But J?urgh Jje grace of swete Jesu 
Was shewed for Pers feyre vertu. 

Pers seyd, ^ Late me furj>e ^ gp*' 5 

pe porter spak and seyde ^ ‘ 39/ 

He pat was d|f, and ddumbe also, 

Spak whan Pers spak h3'm to. 

Pers oute at pe ^ate wente, 

And ped^^r 5ede pere God hym sente. 10 

pe porter ^ede up to pe halle. 

And pys merveyle tplde hem alle. 

How pe squyler of pe kechyn, 

Pers, pat hap woned herej’n. 

He asked Ifve ry^t now late, 15 

And W'ent furp out at pe jate. 

^ 1 rede 50W alle, 3evep gode tei^, 

Whederward pat Pers is went ; 

Wyp Jesu Cryst he is pryve. 

And pat is shewed weyl on me, 30 

For what tyme be to me spak. 

Out of hys moup me poghte ^ brak 
A flamme of fyre bryght and clere ; 
pe fiaumme made me bppe spfke and here, 

Spfke and here now b^pe I may, 25 

Blessed be God and Pers today.' 

pe Igrde and pe gestes alle, 

Qne and oper pat were in halle, 

Had merveyle pat hyt was so, 

pat he my^te swych myracle do. 30 

pan as swype Pers pey soght. 

But al here seking was for no^t. 

* seyd. 

H 2 


^ fur]). 


]>oght* 



lOO 


/. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


Never Pers |?ey ne founde, 

Ny5t ne day, in nQ stounde, 

For he )3at toke Ennok and Ely 
He toke Pers fjurgh hys mercy, 

I’u reste \v}j36utyn ende to Ifde, 5 

For hys meknes and hys gode dede: 

Take ensample here of Pers, 

And parte]3 \\y]> ]?e pore, Okerers, 

For 5JW shal never come joye^ wyf>ynne, 

But 50 Ifve fyrst J)at synne, 10 

And 5yve to almes )3at yche J?yng 
pat 53 have wune wyp okeryng. 

Now wyp God Ifve we Pers; 

God 3yve us grace to do hys maners- 


VIIL THE WEST ]\IIDLAND PROSE PSALTER 
Psalm I. 

Blesced be pe man pat ^ede nou^t in pe cdunseil of wicked, ne 1 5 
s:ode noujt in pe waie of sin5fres, ne sat nau^t in fals jugement. 

2, Ac his ^ wylle was in pe wylle of cure Lfrd, and he schal penche 
in his ® la we bfpe daye and nyjt. 3. And he schal be as pe tre 
pat is ® sett by pe ernynges of waters, pat schal ^eve his frut in his ^ 
tyme. 4. And his ^ iff schal nou^t fallwen, and alle pynges pat pe 20 
ryjtful dop schal multipllen. 5. Nou^t sf ben pe wicked, nou^t sf ; 
as a pdudre pat pe wynde castep fram pe face of pe er]?e \ 6, 

Forpi ne schal nou^t pe wicked arise in jugement, ne pe sinnifrs in 
pe conseyl of pe ry3tfuL 7. For dure Lfrd knew pe waie of pe 
ry^tful, and pe waye of synnfrs schal perissen. 25 

^ ioye. * hiis. ^ ])er])e. 



THE WEST MIDLAND PROSE PSALTER 


lOl 


_ Psalm XXIIL 

Our Lgrd governe]? me, and r!9j>yng shal defailen 16 me ; in po 
stf Je of pasture he sett me ]>er. 2. He norissed me up water of 

fyllyng ; he turned my soule fram po fende. 3. He lad me up po 
bisti3es of ri^tfulnes for his name. 4. For ^if pat ich have g§n 
amiddes of pe shadowe of df}?, I ^ shal nou5t douten ivels, for }3ou 5 
art wyp me. 5. py discipline and pyn amendyng conforted me. 

6. pou madest radi grace in my si^t o^ayns hem pat trublen me. 

7. pou makest fat! myn hfved wyp mercy ; and my drynk, makand 
drunlien, is ® ful clere. 8. And py mere! shal fohven me alle daies 

of ml llf. 9. And pat ich wonne in pe h 5 us of our Lprd in lengf>e 10 
of daies. 

Psalm XXIV. 

I. pe erpe is our Lgrdes and his plente ; pe world and ich §n 
pat wonep perinne. 2. For he bigged it up pe s^^s, and made it 
rfdl up pe fiodes. 3. Who shal cllmben into pe mointein of our 
Lprd, §per who shal stgnde in his hgly stfde? 4. pe innocent in 15 
hgnde and of clfne hert, pat ne tdke nou3t his soule in Idelnesse 
and ne swore no3t in gilerl t 5 his ne3bur. 5. He shal l§ke bliscyng 
of bur Lprd, and mercy of God his helpe. 6. pis is^pe bi3etyng of 
pe sechand hym, sechand pe iace of God of Jacob I 7. Openep 
36ur 3ates, 36 princes of helle, and bep 36 lifted, 36 everlastand 3ates, 20 
and pe kynge of glprie shal entre. 8. Which is he, pat kyng of 
glprie ? pe Lgrd strgnge and mi3tful, pe Lprd my^tful in batail. 

9. Qpenep 36ur 3ates, 36 princes of hevene, and bep 30 lifted, 36 
3ates everlastand, and pe kynge of glprie shal entren. 10. Which 
is he, pat kynge of glprie? pe Lgrd of vertu, he is^ kynge of 25 
gl^rie. 

Psalm LT. 

I. Ha mercy on me, God, efter py mychcl mercy. 2* And 
efter pe mychelnes of py piles, do way my wickednes. 3. Was she ^ 

^ y, and always. ® ys, and occasionally. ® God Jacob. ^ hisa 
* wfaasshe. 



ro2 


t THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


me rtiQve of my wickedneSj and dense me of myn synne. 4 * 
ich knove ^ my wickednes, and my synne is evermgre chains me. 

5. Ich have sjnned to Jjc algn, and ich have don ivel t6f§re J^e, 

J:>at mi be made rj 5tful in "py wordes, and })at ou gvercum whan 
J)ou art jugcd. 6. Se, for ich am conceived in wickednesses, 5 
and my moder conceived me in synnes. ). Se, for ] 70 u loved 
s6])enes ; pe nncerleyn J^ynges and piywe of wisdom ]?ou made to 
me apert. 8. pdu sprengest me, L§rd, wyj? j^y mercy, and I shal 
be made clfne ; j:ou shalt purifie me, and I shal be made whyte 
up snowe, 9. pdu shalt ^eve joie and gladnes to myn heryng , 10 
and pe mylde dedes of my hert shul gladen. 10. Turne py face 
fram mvn sjnnes and do oway al myn wickednes. n. Ha, God, 
make in me cifne hert, and newe pou a ryjt gQst in myn hert. 

12. Ne putt me noujt fram py face, and ne do nau^t oway fram me 
pyn hp!y gpst. 13. gelde to me gladnes of pyn heipe, and conferme 15 
me W)p pyn hgly ggst. 14. I shal tfchen pe wicke^pyn wayes, 
and pe wicked shul ben converted to pe. ig. Ha, pou God, God 
of myn heipe, deliver me of sinnes®, and my tunge shal gladen py 
ry3tfalnes. 16. Lprd, pou shalt ppen myn lippes, and my mdupe 
shal tellen pyn hfry^mg. if. For ^yf pou hade wolde, ich hade ao 
^even sacrifice ; forsope pou ne shalt nou3t dellten in sacrifices. 

18, Trubled gpst'’ is sacrifice to God; pou, God, ne shal nou3t 
despisen pe hert sorowful and meke. 19. Do blisfulllch, Lprd, to 
py chgsen in py gode wille, pat pe gode be confermed in hevens. 

20. pan shalt ou take sacrifice of ry^t service, and honours ; hii 25 
shul pan setten godenesses tof^re py thrgne. 

Psalm XC. 

I. Lprd, pdu art made socdur to ous fram kynde fd klnde. 2. 
Tdfpre pat pe mounteins were made, pper pe erpe’’^ W'ere fourmed 
and pe werld pdu art God, fram pe world unto pe Avorld wypduten 
ende. 3. Ne turne pdu nou^t into mildnes ; and pdu seidest, 30 

^ Lnewe. ® why^te. ® beiyngf. * synmes. * sines. ® god. ^ perjie. 



THE WEST MIDLAND PROSE PSALTER 103 

childer of men, turne}? 30U. 4. For a ]?ousarid ^eres ben tofgre 

]?yn e^en as ^isterdai j^at is passed. 5. And ]?e kepyng o ny^t, 

};at for nou^t ben had, shul be her ^eres. 6. Passe he as gresse in 
]?e momyng ; fiorische he in ]:>e mornyng and passe ; falle he at 
fven and harden and wax he drie. 7. For we failed in ]?yn Ire, and 5 
we ben disturbed in J^yn vengeaunce. 8. pou laidest our wicked- 
nesse in py si^t ; our world is in li^tyng of py chere. 9. For alle 
dur daies faileden, and we failed in pyn yre, 10. Our jeres shul 
penchen as pe lob, pe dales of our 50 res in pe seventi ^ere. ix. 
Forsdpe ^yf 6511 5ere ben in myjtes, pe m^re Qver hem shal be 10 
travail and sorowe. 12. For mildnes comep ® peron, and we shul be 
wipnumen. 13. Who knew pe my^t of p>m ire, and to tellen py 
wrape for py drede? 14. Make s§ pyn helpe knowen, and pe If red 
of hert in wisdome. 15. Lfrd, be pou turned unto nou, and be 
pou bidlich up py servantes. 16. We ben fulhld frlich of py 15 
mercy, we shul gladen and dellten in alle our daies. 17. We 
gladed in pe daies in which pou lowed us, for pe jeres in ■which we 
sei^en ivels. 18. Loke to py servauntes and to pyn werkes, and 
dresce her sones. 19. And pe shynyng of our Lfrd God be up us, 
and dresce up us pe werkes of oQr hgndes, and dresce up us pe 
■werkes of our hgndes \ 

Psalm XCL 

I. He pat wonep* in pe helpe of pe he^est, he shal dwelle in pe 
defens of God of heven. 2. He shal saie to our Lgid, pou art 
my taker and my refut ; ml God, I shal hgpen in hym. 3. For 
he deliverd me fram pe trappcs of pe fendes, and fram asper w 5 rd 35 
of men, 4, And he shal shadow pe wyp hys shulderis, and pou 
shalt hgpe under hys fepers. 5. pe sopenes of hym shal cumpas 
pe wyp shelde, and pou ne shalt nou^t ddute of pe drede of ny3t ; 

6 . Of temptacidun waxand in dale, fram nede ggand in derknes, 
fram pe curs of pe fende bry5t sh^yng. 7. A pdusand tempta- 30 
ciouns shul fallen fram pT* syde,.and ten pousandes fram py r)’3t 

^ heven. * com. * last clause repeated ^ whonel), ^ ye. 



X04 /* the midland dialect 

half; J)e devel, forsoJ>e, ne shal no5t comen to J^e. 8. pou shall 
se, fono|^e, \vyj? pyn ejen, j^ou shall se ]?e ^eldyrig of sjn^^rs. 
9. For {^ou, Lyrd/art myn h§^e, and };hu setted >y refut alder- 
hc3e&t. 10. Yvcl ne shal nou3t com to pe, and turment ne shal 
nou^t com ncre J^y tabernacle, ii. For he sent to his aungels of 
fe, pat hii kepe pe in alle pjn waies. 12. Hii shul bfre pe in 
hgndes pat tdu ne liirt noujt, peraventure, py wyp 
13. pdu shalt up qucintis^ and godenes, and pou shalt defoule 
pe ftmde and helle. 14. For he hgped in me, and 1 shal deliver 
hym; I shal defenden hym, for Le knew my name. 15. He cried 
to me and I shal here hym; ich am wyp hym in tribulacioun, 
I shal defend him and glprifien hym. 16. 1 shal fulfillen hym 
wyp lengpe of daies, and 1 shal she we hym mm helpe. 


PSVL3I CIIL 

I. Ha, pou my soule, blisce our LOrd; and alle pynges pat ben 
w)plnnen me, blisce hys h^ll name. 2. Ha, pou my soule, blisce 
our L9rd; and ne wille pou nou^t for^ete alle his ^eldeinges. 
3. pe which is merciful to alle .pin wickednesses; pe 'which hflep’* 
alle py sekenisses. pe which ransounnep py llf fram dfp; pe 
which erdiinep pe wyp mercy and piles. 5. pe which fulfillep py ^ 
desire in godes ^ ; py ^engpe shal be made new as of an f me. 
6, Our iQrd is doand mercies and jugement to alle pe suffrand 
wrpnge. 7. He made hys waies knowen to IVIoyses ; he did to pe 
childer of Israel her willes. 8. Our Lgrd is ry^tful and mercmble, 
and of Ipnge wille and michel merciable. 9. He ne shal nou^t 
wrappe him w’vpduten ende, ne he ne shal nou^t menacen wypouten 
ende 10. He ne did nou^t to us efter our synjes, ne he ne jeldep 
nou^t to us efter dur wickednes. ii. For efter pe he^t of heven 
fram eipe he streinped ® hys mercy up hem pat dreden hym. 12. HG 
made fer fram us dur wickednes, as pe fste departep fram pe west. 


^ qnenitis. ^ hel})e. ^ J?e. * goddes. ® last clause fi om Dublin MS , 
® MS . possibly strein]>ed ; Dublin MS . streng})id. 



THE EARL OF TOULOUSE 


205 

13. As f)e fader has mercy on his childer, our L^rd is merciable 
of hem ]>2ii dreden hym; for he knowef> Cur’ faintes. 14. He 
recorded ]?at ^ve ben pduder Man is as hai ; bys dales ben as 
floure of J^e feld; sg he shal florissen. 15. For ggst shal passen 
in hym, and he ne shal nou5t dwelle, and he ne shal r.Q mpre knowen 5 
his stfde. 16. pe mercy of our Lord is forso]:e fram ^vypouten 
ende unto \vy]:outen ende^ up hem pat dreden hym. 17. And 
his r:5tfu]nes is unto^ child of childcr 15 hem pat® kepen his 
testament. 18. And hii ben remembraunt of Ins comaundements® 
to don hem. 19. Our Lgrd shal di3ten his sfte in heven, and his m 
kyngdome shal Iprdship alle. 20. Ha, alle his angeles, mijtful of 
vertu, doand his worde, to here pe voice of hys \v5rdes, bliscep 
our Lprd. 21. Ha, alle his vertu, bliscep our Lgrd ; 50 his ministris, 
pat don hys wille, bliscep’' our Lprd. 23. ge alle werke of dur 
Lprd, bliscep our Lyrd in alle stfdes of his lyrdship; ha, pou my 15 
soule, blisce ® dur Lgrd. 


IX. THE EARL OF TOULOUSE 

All they assentyd to the sawe. 

They thoght he spake rfson and lawe. 

Then ans\veryd pe kyng wyth erdwne, 

‘Fayre falle the for thyn avyse/ : 

He callyd knyghtys of nybyll pryce, 

And badd them be rydy bowne 
For to crye ihorow all pe lynde, 

Bythe be syy and be synde, 

If** they fynde mowne , 

A man pat is’^ sy moche of myght, 

That for pat lady dar take pe fyght; 

He schall have hys waresoun’h 

^ knowe and erasure in MS. ; our, from Dublin MS. * prude. ® unto , 
■wy))outen ende, from Dublin MS. * into. ® >a. * comaundementj. 

^ blisced. ® blisebe. ® yf, as always. ** ys, as always, “ wareson. 



Io6 /. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 

MessangerySj I* undurst9nde, 

Crved thorow all J?e l^nde 
In many a ryche cyte, 

If any man durste prove hys my^t 
In trewe quarell for to fygbt, 

Weie avaunscd schulde he bee. 

The Erie of Tolous® herde® J^ys telJe, 
What anger the lady befelle, 

Thereof he ihoghte** grfte p}'te. 

If he wyste that sche had ryght, 

He wolde aventure hys lyfe to fjght 
For that lady free. 

For hur he morned njjt and day, 

And to hymselfe can he say 
He wolde aventure hys Jyfe ; 

‘If I may wytt J?at sche be trewe, 

They J^at have hur accused schull rewe, 
But they stynte of ther stryfe.' 

The erle seyde, 'Bl® Seynte Jphn, 

Into® Almayn wyll I gpqn 
Where I have fgmen ryfe; 

I prey to God full of myght, 

That I have trewe quarell to fy^t, 

Out of wp to Wynne {?at wyfe.' 

He rpde on huntyng on a day, 

A marchand mett he bl ]>t way, 

And asked hym of whens he was. 
‘Lprde,' he seyde, ‘of Almayn/ 

Anpn the erle can hym frayne 
Of that ilke"^ case. 

^ y regularly. ® Tullous, sometimes Tollons. ® harde. 

* b2, as always. * ynto. ^ ylke. 


lO 


15 

20 


25 

30 

* thoght. 



THE EARL OF TOULOUSE 


107 


^ Wherefore is youre ^ emperes 
Put in sp grfte dystress, 

Telle me for Goddys grace; 

Is sche gylty sq mote thou the ? ' 

‘ Nay, bi hym J)at dyed on tree, 

That schope man aftur hys face/ 

Then seyde the erle wylhoute® lett, 

‘ When is the day sett, 

Brente that sche schulde bee?' 

The marchande seyde, ‘Sikerlyke^ 

Jven thys day thre wyke, 

And therfpre wp is mee/ 

The erle seyde, ‘1 schall the telle. 

Code horsys I have t5 selle, 

And stedys two or thre. 

Certys myght I selle ]?em yare, 

Thidur® wyth the wolde 1 fare 
That syghte® for to see/ 

The marchand seyd wyth^ wordys hende, 
*Into the Ignde if ye wyll wende, 

Hyt wolde be for youre prbwe; 

There may ye selle ]?em at your wylle/ 
Angn the erle seyde hym tylle, 

^ Syr, herkyn to me ® nowe ; 

Thys jurney® wylt J?du wyth me dwelle 
Twenty pounde^® I schall the telle 
To mede, I make a vuwe/ 

The marchand grauntyd hyt’^ an§n. 

The erle seyde, Seynt Jphn, 

Thy wylle I aliJwe/ 

^ yowre, as often. ® gylte. ® wtowte, as often. 

® thednr. ® syght. wyth, not in MS, * herkyn me. 
pownde. h3rt, not in MS. 


10 


15 


20 


25 


ao 

sekyrlyke. 
* yurney. 



Io8 /. THE MIDLA.WD DIALECT 

The erle tplde h}m in }?at tyde, 

Where he schulde hym abyde. 

And homeward wente hce. 
lie busked hjm J^al i\g man wyste 
For mik}lP on Inm was hys tryste. 

lie seyde, *Syr, gg wyth mee/ 

Wyth them they Icke stedj’S sevyn, — 
There were ng fayrer® undjT hcvyn 
That any man myght see. 

Into Alniayn J>cy can ryde ; 

As a corsur of pryde 

He semyd for to bee. 

The marchand was a trewe gyde; 

The erle and he togedur can ryde 
Tyll they came to that place. 

A niyle besyde the castell, 

There the emperdure can dwells, 

A ryche abbey iher was; 

Of the abbot Ifve they gatt 
To spjorne^ and make J?er horsys fait; 

That was a ngbyll cas. 

The abbot was the ladyes fmc, 

For hur he was in grfte wandrfme, 

And moche mornyng he mas^ 

S9 hytt befelle upon a day 
To churche the erle toke J^e way, 

A masse for to here. 

He was a fcyre man and an hye; 

\\'hen the abbot hym sye, 

Fie seyde, ‘SJt, come nere. 

^ mekyll. ^ f^yre. ® coresar of mekyll. * soyome. 


10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

® mase. 



THE EARL OF TOULOUSE 


log 


Syr, ^vhen the masse is done, 

I pray you fte wyth me at noonc, 

If youre wyiie were/ 

The erle grauntyd all wyth game; 

Afpre mfte they wysche all same, 5 

And to m§te they wente in fere. 

Aftur mfte, as I you say, 

Into an orchard pey toke J^e wa}", 

The abbot and the knyght. 

The abbot seyde and syghed sare, lo 

‘ Certys, syr, I l}^e * in care 
For a lady bryght; 

Sche is accusyd, my herte is wpp, 

Therfpre sche schall to dfthe ggg 

All agayne the ryght; 15 

But sche have helpe, verrament, 

In a^ fyre sche schall be brente 
Thys day sevenyght.' 

The eile seyde, * Sg have I blysse. 

Of hyr me]?ynky]? grfle rewj?e hyt is, 20 

Trewe if that sche bee/ 

The abbot seyde, Seynt Poule, 

For hur I durre® ley my soule 
That nevyr gyhy^ was sche, 

Soche werkys nevyr sche wroght, 25 

Neythyr in dede nor in thoght, 

Save a rynge 59 free 

To J>e Erie cf Tolbus sche gafe^wyth wynne, 

In fse of hym and for n9 s}uine; 

In schrj'fte thus tpide sche me/ 30 

^ leve, 2 not ia MS. ® dar, * gylte. ® Safe hyt 



no 


/. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


The crle seyde, ‘ Sylh hyt is sqq, 

Cryste wrfke hur of hure^ wqq, 

That boglit hur wyth hys bloode. 

Wolde }e sekyr me, wythbut fayle, 

For to hglde ire we counsayle, 

Hyt myght be for youre g5de/ 

The abbot seyde bi bokes ffle 
And hys^ professyon, pa.t he wolde hfle. 
And ellys he were wbde. 

‘I am he p3.t sche gafe the rynge 
For to be bwre tpkenynge, 

Now hfle^ hyt for the rode. 

1 am comyn, lefe syr, 

To take the batayle for hyr, 

And^ thereto st^nde wyth ryght; 

But fyrste myselfe I wole hur schryve. 

And if i fyxide hur clfne of lyve, 

Then wyll my herte be l}^ght. 

Let dyght me in monkys wede 
To pat place men ® schulde hyr Ifde, 

To dfthe to be dyght; 

When 1 have schryvyn® hyr, wythbut fayle 
For hur I wyll take j^e ^ batayle, 

As I am trewe knyght/ 

The abbot was nevyr sg gladd, 

Nere for joie* he waxe madd, 

The erle can he kysse; 

They made mery* and sfewe care 
All that sevenyght he dwellyd J?are, 

In myrthe, withoute’® mysse, 

^ hur. * and be hys. * heyle. * and, not in MS. * ]:at men. ® 
^ J>e, not in MS. * yoye. ^ mere. wythout. 


lo 


15 


20 


25 


30 

schrevyn. 



THE EARL OF TOULOUSE 


That day lady schulde be brent 
The erle wyth the abbot wente 
In monkys \vede, ywys; 

To the emperour he knelyd blyve 
That he myght J>at lady schryve ; 

Anpn receyved ^ he is. 

He examyned liur wyttyrly. 

As hyt seythe in the stgry; 

Sche was 'W 3 ’thoute gylte. 

Sche seyde, hym lp 2 Lt dyed on tree, 
Trespas was nevyr npne in me 
Wherefore 1 schulde be spjdte. 

Save gpnys, wythoute Ifsynge, 

To the Erie of Tolous 1 gafe a rynge; 

Assoyle me if thou wylte. 

But f>us my destanye is come® to ende. 
That in pys fyre I muste be brende ; 

There Goddys wylle be fulfyllt'*/ 

The erle assoyled hur wyth hys hgnde. 

And sy]3en pertely he can upslgnde. 

And seyde, ^ Lgrdyngys, pfse I 
Ye that have accused J>ys lady gente, 

Ye be w'orthy to be brente/ 

That ggn knyght made a rfgs : 

^Thou carle monke, wyth all Ipy gynne, 
Thowe youre abbot be of hur kynne, 

Hur sorowe schalt thou not eggs ; 

Ryght tg thou woldyst sayne 

Thowe all youre covent had bi hyr layn, 

Sg are ye lythyr and Iggs/ 

^ Jjat fe. ® resceyved* ® comyn. * fulfyllyt. 



1X2 


/. r//£ MIDLA.XD DIALECT 


The erle answeryd wytli 'svordys free, 
‘ Pyr, that ggn 1 trowc tholi be 
Thys lady afxused has. 
lliowe we be men of relvgyon, 

Thou serial t do us but i^son 
For all, the fare thou mas; 

I prove on hur thou sayst not ryght, 
Ly, here my glove wyth f>e to fyght, 
1 undyrtake thys case ; 

As^ false men, I schall you kenne 
In redde fyre for to brenne, 

Therto God gyf me grace/ 


All )5at stoden in that place, 

Thankyd God of hys grace, 

Wyth^te any fayle. 

Tlie tw6 knyghtys were full wrpthe ; 

He schulde be dedd, J^ey swfre grfte pthe, 
Cut hyt myght not avayle. 

The erle w^ente there besyde. 

And armyd hym wyth meky II pryde, 

Hys enemyes to assayle. 

Manly, when they tdgedur mett, 

They hewe thorow helme and basenet, 

And marryd* many a mayle. 

They ridyn® togedur wythbut lakfc, 

That hys ppn spfre on hym brakk, 

That othyr faylyd thpp. 

The erle smpte hym wyth hys spfre, 
Thorow the body he can hym bfre, 

To grounde can he ggg. 


a 


os. 


® martyred. 


* redyn. 



THE EARL OF TOULOUSE 




That sawe that of>cr\ and fasle can flee; 

The erle gvyrtuke hjm undur a Ire, 

And wroght hym niikylP \vgo; 

There ]:>ys traytdur can h3m ^elde^ 

As'* recrfaunt in the felde*''*, 5 

He niyght not fle hym frg^. 

Before the emperoure they wente, 

And there he made hym, verrament. 

To telle for the ng^nys. 

He sejde, ‘We thoghte® hur to spylle 10 

For sche wolde not do owre 'svylle. 

That worthy is in WQiiys^V 
The erle answeryd hym then, 

‘ Therfgre, tray tours, ye schall brenne 

In thys fyre bgihe at pnys/ 15 

The erle angn them^ hente, 

And in the fjTe he J^em brente, 

Flfsche, felle, and bggnys. 

When ]?ey were brent bgthe l^\gg. 

The erle prevely can ggg 
To that ryche abbayc, 

Wyth joye® and processyoun 
They fett the lady into the tdwne, 

Wyth myrlhe as* I telle may. 

The emperoure was full gladd; 25 

‘ Fctte me the monke/ angn he badcl, 

Why wente he sg awaye? 

A byschoperyke 1 wyll hym gyve®, 

IMy helpe, my love, whyll I lyve’®, 

Ll God that owyth thys day.^ 30 

odyr. 2 ® 5ylde. ■* os. ® fdcle. ® thoght. 

woiinys. ^ hym. * yoye. ^ geve. leve. 


I 



/. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


114 


The abbot knelyd on hys knee, 

And seyde, 'Lgrde, gOne is hee 
To hys owne londe; 

Ho dwellyth wyth the P9pe of Rome, 

He Myii Le glad of hys come, 5 

I do }ou to undurstpnde/ 

‘Syr abbot V quod the emperdure, 

‘To me hyt ■were a dyshondure, 

Soche wdrdes 1 rede thou wgnde ; 

Anpne, in haste, that I hym see, 10 

Or thou schalt nevyr have gdde of me, 

And thertd here myn h^nde/ 

‘Lprde,* he seyde, ‘s}the hyt is sgg 
Aftur hym }?at I muste ggg. 

Ye muste make me seurte; 25 

In case he have byn youre fgg. 

Ye schall not do hym np wgp ; 

And then, al sg mote I thee, 

Aftur hym I wyll wend^ 

S9 that ye wyll be hys frend, 20 

If youre wylle bee/ 

‘ 5ys,' seyde the emperoure full fayne, 

‘All my kynne }?ogh he had slayne. 

He is welcome to mee/ 

Then spake the abbot wordys free, 25 

‘Lprde, 1 tryste now on thee, 

Ye wyll do as® ye say^; 

Hyt is Syr Barnard of Toldus, 

A npbyll knyght and a chyvalrous, 

That hath done thys jurnay®/ 30 

^ abbot, not in MS. ® wynde. * os. * sey. ® jnmey. 



THE EARL OF TOULOUSE 


^ wende. 


‘Now certys/ seyde the emper^re, 

' To me hyt is grft dyshoiioure ; 

An 9 n, Syr, I the pray, 

Aftur hym f>at thou wend \ 

We schall kysse and be gode frend% 
Bi God that owyth thys day/ 

The abbot seyde, ‘ I assente/ 

Aftur the erle angn he wente, 

‘ And seyde, ‘ Syr, gg wyth mee. 
]\ry Igrde and ye, bl Seynt Jph.i, 
Schull be made bgthe at pgii, 

Goode frendys for to bee/ 

Therof ]>q erle was full fayne. 

The emperdure came hym agayne 
And sayde, ‘IMy frende sg free, 
My wrathe® here 1 the forgyve; 

3My heipe, my love, whyll 1 lyve, 

Bi hym that dyed on tree/ 

Tdgedur lovely can they kysse ; 
Thereof all men had grfte blysse, 
The Tpmaunse tellyth sgg. 

He made hym steward of hys Ipnde, 
And sfsyd agayne into hys hpnde 
That he had rafte hym frgp. 

The emperdure livyd^ but yerys thre 
Be elexion® of the Iprdys free 
The erle toke they ihgg, 

And® made hym ther emperdure. 

For he was styfFe in stoure 
To fyght agayne hys fgg. 

® frende, * wrath. * levyd, 

« they. 



I THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


llS 

He weddyd lady to hys wyfe 
With joye^ and myrthe J^ey ladd J^er lyfe 
Twenty }'crc and three. 

Telwene fern had ]>cy chyldyr fyftene^ 
Doghty knvghtys all bedene, 

And semely on to see. 

In Rome thys geste cronyclyd is% 

A lay of Bretayne callyd pvys^ 

And evyr mgre schall bee. 

Jesu® Cryste to hevyn us brynge, 

There to have owre wonnyng ; 

Amen, amen, for charytee. 


X. GILD OF THE HOLY TRINITY AND OF 
SAINT WILLIAM OF NORWICH 

L\ ® name of ]?e Fader and Sone and Ugly Ggsf, thre 
persones, g Cod in Trinite, and in fe worschipe^ of dure Lavedy, 
Seynte ]\larle his dcre moder, and of Seynt William )?e hply 
innocent and dlgne marter, and alle halewjn : in ]?e yer of oure 
Lprd Jesu* Cryst a thousande thre hundred seventy and sexe, 
peltyers and o}?ere god men begunne ]?is gylde and y\s bretherhgd 
of Seynt Willyam, ]?e hgly innocent and marter in Norwyche ; and 
alle yis orderiaunces undirwriten al bretheren and systeren 
schulyii helden and kepen upen here p^er. 

At }q fyrste alle ]3e bretheren and systeren thus han behpten, 
]?at f>ey every yer, on ]?e Sunday next aftyr ]>q ff st of Seynt Peter 

1 }oye. ® XV. ® geste ys cronycglyd ywis. * callyd hyt ys. 
* Jhn. ® k as y except where printed th. ^ -worchepe, and always. 

*jliesu- * undinvreten. nexst 



GILD OF ST, WILLIAM OF NORWICH 


II7 

and Powe), in worschipe of ]>Q Trinite and of oure Lfvedy and 
Seynt William and alle halwen, scbullen offeren to floured candelys 
aforn Seynt Willyams tdumbe in pc mynstre of pe Trinite, and 
ever! of hem offeren an halpeny at pc messe and heren al pc 
messe. And qwosQ be absent, ]>anne he schal payen to Seynt 5 
Williams lyhte ^ thre pound of wax ; and it schal ben reysed and 
gadered bi pc alderman and his felas. AIsq a knave chyld inno- 
cent, schal ' bfren a candel ]?at day, pc wyghte of to pound, led 
betwyxen to gode men, tpkenynge of )5e glprydus marter. 

AIsq it is ordeyned p2t np man schal ben excusyd of absence 10 
at ]?at messe, but it be for pc kynges® servise, or^ for strpnge 
sekenesse, or* twenty myle dwellynge fiQ pis cyte®, ]?at he ne schal 
payen pe peyne of thre pound of wax. And qwosg schal ben 
excused for any o]?er schyl, it schal ben at pc aldermannes w)’l 
and at pc cumpany. 1 3 

Als§ alle pc bretheryn and systeryn ban ordeyned ® and graunled 
for any ordenaunce poX is mad or schal ben mad ampnges hem, 
j^at J?ey schal save pc kynge hys ryhte^, and npn prejudys don 
ageyn his lawe in j?es ordenaunce. 

Alsp it is ordeyned, psX everyche broj?er and syster of ]?i$ gy Ide, 20 
frly on morwe aft}T pc gyldeday, schal heryn a messe of requiem 
for alle pc brethere soules and syster en soulcs of j^is gylde, and 
for alle crystene soules, at Seynt Williams auter in j^e mynstre of 
J^e Trynjte in Norwyche, and offeren a ferthynge. And qwdsp be 
wane, schal paye a pound of wax. And qwan j^e messe is don, 25 
bl® her aldermannes asent J?ey schal alle togedere gpn to an in, 
and every man psX ha]? any ® catelle of pc gilde leyn it ddun ; and 
ordeynen per of here lykynge bl® comoun assent, and chesen 
offyeeres for j^e nexte yer. And qwo fayle schal payen three 
pound of wax. And eyghte men of ]?e aldermannes chesynge, 30 
on J>e g}ddeday, schulen chesen an alderman and to felas, and 
a somonor for pc nexte yer. 

^ lythe. ® schal, not in MS. ^ kyngges. * er, as always. * syte. 

® hordeyned. ^ rythe. ® be, as always. * ony. viii. 



iiS /. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 

Ahg it is ordeyned, in worschipe of ]>e Trinite and of oure 
l^fvedy Seynt iMaric, and of Scynt William and of alle hahvyn, 

]:at qwat brother or svster bi Goddis spnde falle in mischefe ot 
mys^'se, and have nout t5 heljien hemselfej he schal ban almesse 
of cvcri brd]3er and syster every woke, Icstende his myschefcj a fer- 5 
thynge; of qwyche ferthynges he schal ban fourtene pens^, and 
j^e remenaunt gqn Id catelle. But if it be his foly, be schal nout 
ban of J?e almes^. 

Alsg it is ordeyned bl comdun assent, qwcig be chgsen in 
offys and refuse it, be schal paye to Seynt Wjlliams lyhte^ thre 10 
pound of wax, and up peyne of his gthe. 

Also if any* brother or syster deye, he schal han of })e gylde 
foure torches, and foure pore men cladde, abduten his cors ; ande 
every brother and syster schul ® ofFeren at his messe, and heryn al 
pe messe and byden his enterynge, and at messe offeryn a fer- 15 
thynge, and an halpeny ^even to almes for )>q ® soule ; and ^even 
to a messe a peny, qwyche schal ^ be gaderyd bl ]>e alderman 
and hise felas to don for j^e soule and for alle crystene. Alsg if 
any brdjjer or syster deye sevene myle frg pe cite, j^e alderman and 
dper sevene bretheryn at his exeqmses schul ® wende in fere to pe 20 
cors, and ordeynen and don for pe soule as for gn o[pe bretheren. 

Alsg it is ordeyned bl comoun assent, J^at ]^ese bretheren, in 
worschipe of )>e Holy Trinyte and Seynt William, -schul ftyn 
togedere on psi day at here comoun cost. And qw^dsg be 
sombuned to don semble or to congregacioun beforn pe alder- 25 
man and j^e bretheryn and come nout, he schal paye a pound of 
wax to pe lyht*. Alsg it is ordeyned bl comoun assent psit ng 
broj^er ne syster in J>is glide schal be reseyvet but bl pe alderman 
and twelve bretheryn. 

Alsg it is ordeyned bl comoun assent J^at pe comoun belleman 30 
schal ggn thurghe pe cite on })e gildeday after none, and re- 
comandyn al pe brethere soules and systeres of pe glide bi name, 

* xHij d. ® times. ® lythe. * ony. * schul, not in MS. ® 5e. 

^ schal, not in MS. * exequises schul, not in MS- ® lyt 



JOHN MYRCS INSTRUCTIONS 


1 19 

and alle crystene soules ; and seyn J)at a messe of rf quiem schal 
ben seyd f riy on ]:e morwen, bl prime day, in memorle of ]?e soules 
and alle crystene, and somounyn alle ]3e bretheryn and systeryn 
]?at Jjey ben at j^e messe at f>e auter of Seynt William at fat tyme 
of prime, up f e peyne of thre pound of wax. 


XL JOHN MYRC^S INSTRUCTIONS FOR 
PARISH PRIESTS* 

God seyth hjmself, as wryten we fynde, 

That whenne fe blynde Ifdeth fe blyndc 
Into fe dyche fey fallen bpp, 

For fey ne sen whareby to gp. 

Sp faren prestes by dawe; 10 

They beth blynde in Goddes lawe, 

That whenne fey scholde fe pepul rede, 

Into synne fey do hem Ifde. 

Thus fey have do now fulle ^gre, 

And alle is® for defawte of Igre ; 15 

Wharefgre, fou preste curatoure, 

5ef fou pifse thy Savydure, 
gef Ihdw be not grfte clerk, 

Loke thdw mdste on thys werk; 

For here thdw my^te fynde and^ rede 20 

That fe behdveth to conne nede, 

How thow schalt thy paresche prfche, 

And what fe nedeth hem to tgche; 

And whyche fou moste fyself be, 

Here alsg thdw myjte hyt se, 

^ Latin title reads, * Propter presbiterum parochialem instruendnm/ ^ ys, 
as often, ® as often. 


35 



/. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


For Iu}tel is \\orthy j?y prfchjTige 
^ef ihw be of fvuyle lyvynge* 

Preste, f>yself thow muste be chast, 

And say ]^y serves wyjjuwtcn bast, 

That mow the and herte acorden I fere, 

5ef thUw wole that God )?e here. 

Of h 9 nde and m6^*]?e fjoa moste be trewe, 
And grfte 9 j:cs thbw moste eschewe^; 

In worde and dede J^uu moste be mylde, 
Bgthe to mon and 16 chyldc. 

Dronkelfc and glotonye, 

Pruydc and slouj^c and envye, 

Alle ]?6w moste putten away 
5er f>ow wolt serve God to pay. 

That pQ nedetb, fte and drynke, 

But sl^ l^y lust for any thynge. 

Tavfcines’alsp thow m5ste forsake, 

And marchaundyse pow schalt not make; 
Wrastelynge and schotynge and suche g5me® 
Thow myjte not use wythuwte blame; 
Hawkynge, huntynge, and dawnsynge, 

Thow moste fpigp for any thynge. 

Cuttede clpthes and pyked schone, 

Thy gode fame pey wole forddne. 

IMarketes and feyres 1 the forbede, 

But hyt be for the m§re nede. 

In honeste clothes thow moste gpn, 

Baselard ne^ bawdry ke wfre ]?6w ngn; 

Bfrde and crowne thow moste be schave, 

5ef thow wole thy ordere save. 

Of mfte and drynke f>6w moste be fre, 

To pore and ryche by thy degre. 

^ encbewe. ® tavernej. ® manergame. ^ ny. 



yO//.Y MYRaS INSTRUCTIONS 


I3I 


^5rne tho^' moste thy sawtere rede, 

And of the day of dome have drede ; 

And evere do gode a^cyncs ele^, 

Or elles thow my5le not lyvc welc. 

Wymmones serves thdw mdste forsake, 5 

Of evele fame leste they the make ; 

For wymmenes speche that ben schrewes, 

Turne ofte away gode thewes. 

From nyse japes and rybawdye, 

Thow mdste turne away ):iyn ye ; lo 

Tuynde pyn ye pit thow ne se 
The cursede worldes vanyte. 

Thus thys worlde J>dw mdste despyse, 

And hply vertues have in vysc; 

gef thdw dd ]3us, thdw schalt be dere 15 

To alle men that sen and here. 

Thus thdw moste als§ prfchc^ 

•And thy paresche jerne tf che ; 

Whenne gn hath ddne a synne, 

Ldke he lye not Ignge thereynne, 20 

But angn that he hym schryve, 

Be hyt husbande, be hyt wyve, 

Leste he forjet by lentenes day, 

And dute of mynde hyt gg away. 

A1s 9 thdw mdste thy God pay, 25 

Tfche thy paresch pus and say. 

Alle that ben of w^arde and elde, 
pat cunnen hemself kepe and W'elde, 

They schulen alle to chyrche come, 

And ben ischryve alle and some, 30 

And be ihoseled w^ytho^e here 
On asterday alle 1 fere; 

® Subtitle, * Quid et quomodo predicare debet paroebianos sues/ 


* evele. 



122 


/. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


In ]:at day by costome, 

ge schule be hoselet alle and some. 

Tfche hem ]?enne, wyth gode entent, 

To beleve on that sacrament ; 

That ])ey receyve *m forme of brfd, 5 

Hyt is Goddes body ]>at soflered dfd 
Upon the hgly rodctre, 

To bye owre synnes and make us fre. 

Tfche hem ]?enne, never later, 

pat in pe chalys is but wyn and water lo 

That pey receyveth for to drynke, 

After that hfly hoselynge. 

Therfpre warne hem pow schal 
That pey ne chewe pat host' to smal, 

Leste to smale pey done hyt brfke, 15 

And in here teth hyt do stfke; 

Therefore pey schule wyth water and 'wyn 
Clause here mdwp that nojt Ifve perin; 

But tfche hem alle to leve sade^ 

pat hj’t pa«. is in pe awter made, 20 

Hyt is verre Goddes blode 

That he schedde on pe rdde. 

get pdw mbste tfche hem mare, 
pat whenne pey doth to chyrche fare, 
penne bydde hem Ifve here mony wordes, 25 

Here ydei speche and nyce hordes, 

And put away alle vanyte, 

And say here paternoster and ave®: 

Ne nfn in chyrche stfnde schal, 

Ne Ifne to pyler, ne to wal, 30 

But fayre on kneus pey schule hem sette, 

Knelynge doun upon the flette. 


* sadde* 


® here ave. 



JOHN MYRaS INSTRUCTIONS X23 

And pray to God wyth herte meke 
To aeve hem grace and mercy eke, 

SofFere hem to make no here, 

But ay to be in here prayere ; 

And vhenne )?e gospelle ired be schalle, 5 

Tfche hem ))enne 16 stgnde up alle. 

And blesse hem^'" feyre, as ]?ey conne, 

Whenne gloria iibi is bygonne. 

And whenne }>e gospel is idone, 

Tfche hem eft to knele downe sone; 10 

And whenne they here the belle rynge 
To that hply sakerynge, 

Tfche hem knele downe, hgpe ^onge and glde, 

And bgj^e here hgndes up to hglde. 

And say fenne in fjys manere, 15 

Feyre and softely, wythowte here ; 

^Jesu^ Lgrd, welcome fow be, 

In forme of brfd as I }>e se; 

Jesu, for thy hgly name, 

Schelde me today frg synne and schame ; 20 

Schryfte and howsele, Lgrd, graunte ^ me bg 
5r that I schaie hennes gg, 

Amd verre contrycyone of my synne. 

That I, Lgrd, never dye thereinne. 

And as }>ow were of a may ibgre, 25 

Sofere me never to be fbrlgre. 

But whenne ]:>at I schaie hennes w’ende, 

Grawnte me ]?e blysse wythbwten ende. Amen/ 
Tfche hem ]?us, gj^er sum df>ere f>ynge. 

To say at the hgly sakerynge. 3a 

Tfche hem ahg, 1 the pray, 

That whenne j^ey walken in Jje way 


hem not in MS. 


1 Ihn, as in 1. 19. 


* }>OTa gisannte. 



124 


/. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


And sene j^e preste aga}Ti hem comynge, 

Goddes body wyth hym bfrynge, 

Thenne wyth grfte devQcyone, 

Tfchc hem |5ere lo knele adowne. 

Fayre ne fowle, spare J>ey noghte 5 

To worschype hym }>at alle hath wroghte. 

For ry^t^ glad may pat mon be 
}"at gnes in pe day hym^ se; 

For £§ mykyle gode doj? J^at sy5t, — 

As Seynt Austyn tfeheth arj^t, — 10 

pat day pat pdw syst Goddes body 
pese benefyees schalt pou have sycurly: 

Mfte and drynke, at thy nede, 

Ngn schai pe pat day be gnede; 

Idele gthes and wordes alsg, 15 

God foi5evcp the bg; 

Soden dftb that ilke® day 
The dar not drede wypowte nay; 

Akg pat day, I the ply5te, 

pow schalt not lese pyn yesyjte, 20 

And every fote pat pou ggst penne, 

pat hgly S3’5t for to sene, 

pey schule be Iglde t 5 stgnde in stfde 

Whenne thow hast to hem nede. 

Alsg, wy^hynne chyrche and seyntwary, 25 

Do ryyt thus, as I the say; 

Sgnge and cry and suche fare. 

For to slynte pdw schalt not spare; 

Castynge of axtre and eke of stgn, 

Sofere hem pere to use ngn ; 30 

Bal and bares and suche play, 

Cute of chyrehe^orde put away. 

* ryjtj not in MS. ® may hym. ® yllce. 



JOHN MYRC^S INSTRUCTIONS 


Courte hgldynge, and suche maner ch^st, 
Out of seyntwary put J>dw most ; 

For Cryst hymseif Ifcheth us 

pat hgly chyrche is hys hows, 

pat is made for ng J^j’nge elles 

But for t 5 praye in, as J>e boke telles ; 

pere pe pepulle schale geder wilhinne. 

To prayen and wepen ^ for here synne, 

Tfche hem alsp welle and greythe. 
How pey schule paye here teythe. 

Of alle p3"hge that doth hem newe. 

They schule teythe welle and trewe ; 

After pe costome of pat cuntraj^e, 

Every mon hys teythynge schale paj^e, 
Bgthe of smale and of grgte. 

Of shep and swyn and oper hfte. 

Tej'^pe of hu>Te and of hgnde 
Ggth by costome of pe Ignde. 

I hgide hyt but an ydul pynge 
To spgke mycbe of teythynge. 

For pa5 a preste be but a fonne, 

Aske hys teypjmge welle he conne. 

Wychecrafte and telynge, 

Forbede pou hem for any pynge ; 

For whdsg beleveth in pe fay 
Mote beleve thus by any way. 

That h^’t is a sleghpe of pe del 
pat makep a body to cache el ; 
penne syche belfve he gait hem have, 
pat wychecrafte schale hem save, 

Sg wyth charmes ® and wyth tele 
He is ibro^te a^ejm to heie. 
pus wyth pe fende he is iblende. 

And hys bylfve is ischende. 

^ to wepen, ® chames- 



PART II . 


THE 

DIALECTS OF THE NORTH, THE SOUTH, 
AND THE CITY OF LONDON 

THE NORTHERN DIALECT 

1 . PROLOGUE TO THE CURSOR MUNDI 

]Man yernes ^ rimes for to here, 

And rgmans red on maneres sere: 

Of Alisaundur ]>q conquerour, 

Of July Cesar )5e emparour, 

0 Grece and Troy sh'ange® striif 5 

pere many thosand lesis per liif; 

Of Brut, pat bern baldf of hand, 
pe firste ® conquerour of In gland ; 

O Kyng Arthbur pat was sp rike, 

Quam ngn in hys tim was like; lo 

O ferlys pat hys knyhtes'^ fell 
pat aunters sere I here of tell, 

Als Wawan, Cai, and oper stabell 
For to wfre pe ronde tabell; 

How Charles Kyng and Rauland faght, 15 

With® Sarazins wald pai na saght; 

Of Tristrem and hys ieif Ysote, 

How he for here beconi a sote; 

yhernes. strang/ ‘first. * knythes. ® wit (wyt), as usual. 



THE CUnSOR MUNDI 


1^7 


O Igneck and of Ysambrase, 

O Ydoine and of Amadase, 

Stgris als o sere kin thinges 
O princes, prelates, and o kynges, 

Sanges sere of selcuth rime, 5 

Inglis, Frankys, and LatTne ; 

To rede and here ilk gn is prest 

pe thjmges pat pam likes best 

pe wis man wil o wisdom here, 

pe foul hym diaws^ to foly nere; lo 

pe wrang to here o right is lath, 

And pride wyth buxsumnes is wrath ; 

O chastite has lichur Igth, 

On charite ai werrais wrfth; 

Bot be pe fruit may scilwis se 15 

O quat vertu is ilk a tre. 

Of al kyn fruit pat man schal fynd 
He fettes frg pe rote his kymd; 

O gdde pfrtre corns gode* pfres, 

Wers tre, wers fruit it bfres. 20 

pat I spfke o pis ilke tre 
Bylakens man, b^th me and pe; 
pis fruit bitakens alle oure dedis, 

Bglh gode and ille qua rightly redis. 

Ur dedis frg ur hert tas rote, ' 25 

Quedur ® pai be worth! bSle or bote ; 

For be pe pyng man drawes till 
Men schal him knaw* for god or ill. 

A saumpul her be pam^ 1 say 

pat rages in pare riot ay; zo 

In riot and in rigolage 

Of all pare iiif spend pai pe stage, 

* draglms. * god. * dur- * kaw. ^ jjaem. 



128 


//. THE NORTHERN DIALECT 


' chaunce. 


For nou- is hfilclen n^n in curs 
Bot qua ]5at luve can paramurs. 
pat (o\y luve, fat vanity, 
pum likes non* nan ofer gle; 

Hit neys bot fantum for to say 
Today it is, tumoru away. 

Wylh chaunce of dfd or chaunge ^ of hert, 
pat soft began has endyng smart; 

For w’en pow traistest- wenis at be, 

Frg hir schalt pou, or scho frg pe. 

He pat stilhest® wenis at stand, 

Warre hym, his fall is nexst his hand ; 

Ar he swa brathly don be broght 
Wydur to wende ne wat he noght, 
Bytwixand his luf haf hym ledd 
To slT mede als he forwilh bedd * ; 

For pan sal mede wiihouten® mere 
Be mette for dede or bettur or were. 

ForpI blisce I pat paramour 
Quen I have nede me dds socure; 
pat saves me first in erth® fra syn 
And hevcnblys me helps to wyn. 

For pof 1 quilum haf ben untrew, 

Hyr luve is ay ilike’ new^; 

Hir luve scho ® haldes Ifle illke, 
pat swetter es pan hony o bike. 

Swilk in erih® cs fundun nan, 

For scho es modur and maiden; 

Moder and maiden never pe lesse 
ForpI of hir tok Crist his flesse. 

Qua truly loves pis lemman,^ 
pis es pe love bes never gan; 

“ Iraistes. ® titthest. * bedd, not in MS- ^ 
® berth. ^ ilik. ^ sco. 


lo 


15 


20 


25 


30 


witoten. 



THE CURSOR MUNDl 


129 


For in ]>:s love scho failes never. 

And in pQ.t toper scho lastes ever. 

Of swilk an suld 50 mater* take. 

Crafty ]?at can rimes make, 

Of hir to mak bath rim and sang 
And luve hir swete sun amang. 

Quat bote is to sette traveil 
On ]?yng ]?at may not avail, 
pat es hot fantum o pis werd - 
Als have sene inogh and herd? 

I\Iater fynd 50 large and brade, 
pof rimes f§le of hir be made ; 

Quasa will of hyr fayrnes* spell, 

Find he sal inogh to tell. 

Of hir godnes and hir treuthcde, 

Men may fynd evermar to rede ; 

6 reuth 6 love, and charite, ’ 

Was never hir mak, ne never sal be 
Laved! scho es o IfvedXs all, 

Mild and mek withoiiten gall. 

To nedi neghest on to call, 

And raises synful qnen pai fail. 

Til al cure bale ai for to bete 

Onre Lauerd has made pat maiden swete**; 

parbi man mai hir helping kenn, 

Scho praies® ai for sinful menn; 

Qua menskes hir, pai mai be bald-; 

Scho sal pam jeld a hundretbfald. 

In hir wirschip wald 1 b^n 
A iastand ware apon to myn, 

For to do man knaw hir kyn 
pat us® scl! wirschip cum to wyn* 

1 mater, dim ia MS. * Vfarld. ® hy fames. reat. 

® prais. ® hns. 


10 


35 


20 


25 


30 


^ suette. 



IL THE NORTHERN DIALECT 


Sumkius jestes for to scaw, 
pat done were in pe aide ^ law, 
Bitwix pc aid law and pe new 
How Ciistes® brith bigan to brew^ 

I sal yow schew with myn entent 
Bnjfll of aiperc testament. 

A1 pis W’crkl, gr pis bok blin, 

With Crjstcs help I sal pverrin, 

And tell sum gestes principale, 

For alle may na man have in tale^. 

Bot forpi pat na were may stand 

Withduten grundwall to be lastand, 

pilrfgr pis were sal 1 fund 

Apon a selcuth stedfast grund, 

pat es pe haly trinite 

pat all has wroght w’ith his beute. 

At him seif first I sette mi mere. 
And si then to tell his handewerc^; 

O pe angels first pat fell, 

And sithen I will of Adam tell, 

Of hys oxspring, and of Noe, 

And sumquat of his sunes^* thre; 

Of Abraham and of Ysaac 
pat haly ware withouten make. 

Sythen sal I telle® yow 

Of Jacob and of Esau; 

par neist sal be sythen laid 

How pat Joseph was boght and sM; 

O pe Juus and Moyses 

pat Goddis folk to Ifde him chfs, 

How God bigan pe law hym gyfe, 

pe quilk the Juus in suld life; 




2 Crist. 


3 talle. 


* hand werc- 


smius. 



THE CURSOR MUNDl 


I3I 

O Saul J>e kyng and o Davl, 

How ]?at he faght again Goli ; 

Szthen o Salamon {>e wis. 

How craftilik he did justis; 

How Crist com thoro propheci, 5 

How he com his folk to bii. 

And hit sal be redd yuu Jeanne 
O Joachim and of Sant Anne^ 

O Mare als, hir doghter mild. 

How scho^ was born and bare a child; 10 

How he was born and quen and ware, 

How scho him to f>e temple bar ; 

O kynges f>at him soght, 
pal thre presandes til him broght; 

How jjat Herode kyng, with wogh, 15 

For Crlstes^ sak pe childer slogh; 

How J)e child to Egypte fled 
And how pat he was thepen ledd. 
par sal ^e find sumkyn dedis 

pat Jesus®* did in hys barnhedis; 20 

Sithen o pe Baptist Jphan 

pat Jesu^ baptist in flum Jordan; 

How Jesus, quen he lang had fast. 

Was fpndid with pewikke^* gast; 

Sipen o Jgnes® baptlsyng, 25 

And how him he fdid Herod Kyng; 

How pat Jesu Crist him selve 
Chfs til him apostels twelve, 

And ppenllk bigan to preche 

And alle pat sek ware to leche, 30 

And did pe meracles sua riif 
pat pe Juus him hild in striif; 


^ «iaattaiuie. *.sco,asml. 12. j - * crisL Ih’s, as usual. ' < Ihitr 

-wik. * Ions. 


K 2 



//. THE NORTHERN DIALECT 


132 


Sy]?en hoW J^at haly Drightin 
Turned ^vatur into ^vvn^ 

O five thossand men put he 
Fedd wyth five laves and fisses thre. 

Of a man sal 56 sithen find 5 

pat he gave sight, and born was blind; 

O pc^ spousebrfk w'omman 
pat pe luus dempt to stan; 

How he hfled gn al unfere 

pat seke was thritte and aght yeir; 10 

How pe !Magdaltm with grete 
Com for to was our L^rde fete, 

Of hir and I\rartha pat was fus 
Abote pe nedes of pare hus ; 

O Lazar dfd, laid under lam, 15 

How Jesus raised his llcam; 

How Juus Jesu oft umsette 
And for his sermon thrall thrette; 

How pai sched his blisced blode 

And pined him opon pe rode. 20 

With Crlstes® will pan sal I telle 

How he sipen hared helle ; 

How Juus with per grft unschill 
Wend his uprisyng to dill; 

How he uprais, how he upstey, 35 

Many man onstad and sey ; 

How he pat o myght es mast 
Send intill erth his haly gast ; 

O twelve apostlis sumkyn gest, 

Bot how pai endid at pe lest. 30 

How our Lfvedi endid and yald 
Hir sely saul, bit sal be tald: 

^ vyn. ® J>e, ttot in Cotton, but in all other MSS. * crist. 



THE CURSOR MUNDI 


133 


O )>e hall croice, how it was kyd 
Lang efterward J^at it was hid; 

Of Antecrist com, J^at sal be kene. 

And o ]3e drerl days fivetcm 

pat sal cum forwith domesday. 5 

Sythen of })e dome yow sal 1 say, 

pan of oure LfvedI murnand mode 

For hir sune scho sagh on rode. 

pe laste rfsun of all pis ron 

Sal be of hir concepcion. 10 

pis are the maters redde on raw 
pat I thynk in pis bok to draw, 

Schortly rim and on pe dede 
For man! er pai herof to spede. 

Notful me thine it ware to man 15 

To knaw himself how he began ; 

How he^ began in werld to br§de, 

How his oxspring began to sprfde; 

Bath 0 pe first and d pe last 

In quatkin curs pis werld es past. ?o 

Efter haly kyrees® state 
pis like bok it es* transtete, 

Into Inglis tong to rede 
For pe love of Inglis lede, 

Inglis lede of Ingeland^ 25 

For pe commun at understand. 

Frankis rimes here I redd 
Comunlik in ilk a sted®; 

Mast es it wroght for Frankis man, 

Quat is for him na Frankis can? 30 

Of Ingeland^ pe nacion, 

Es Inglis man par in commun; 


* be, not in MS. 


® kyre. * ilk bok is es. 


Ingland. ® ilk sted- 



134 


IL THE NORTHERN DIALECT 


pe s|;rc}ie pat man with mast may spede. 

Mast parwith t 5 spfke war nede. 

Selden was for an! chance 
Praised Inglis tong in France; 

Give we ilk an pare langage, 5 

Me think we do pam ngn outrage. 

To lauid Inglis^ man I spell 
pat understandes pat I tell, 

And to ppg> spfke I alpermast 

pat won in unwarces to wast 10 

pair liif in trofel and truandls, 

To be ware with pat self and was 
Sumquat unto pat thing to tent, 
pat al par mode might with amend. 

Ful il ha pai pat spending spend, 15 

pat findes na frute ® parof at end. 

Sii word and were sum we til heild, 

TraistlT acountes® sal we yeild; 

parfpr do draw^ pam hiderward 

pat 0 pe pardon will ha part; 20 

To here and hald sal ha pardon 

0 pliglit with CrTstes^ benisun. 

Now 0 pis prgloug ml we blin”, 

In CrTstes * nam our bok begin ; 

Cursur 0 Werld man aght it call, 25 

For almast it pverrennes all. 

Tak we our biginning pan 
Of him pat al pis werld bigan. 

^ laud and Inglis. ® fro. ® armites, but meaningless, 

- Crist. ^ b. 



VEATH OF SAINT ANDREW 


23s 


II. THE DEATH OF SAINT ANDREW 

Saint Andrew, Cristis apostil dere, 

Whils he went in ]:>is werld here, 

Ful mekill folk in sere cuntre 
To cristen trouth convertid he ; 

And at pe last, 59 it byfell. 

In a cete whpre he gun dwell. 

A domesman in J?at cete was, 

And his name was cald Egeas ; 

A man pat lifed in maumetry 
And in fals goddes, ful of envy. 

He gederd togedir bpth hgnd and ^ fre, 
Riche and pover of ilk cuntre. 

And bad pai suld mSk sacrafise 
Unto his goddes of mekil pnse; 

And whosg wold noght ofrand make, 

Grfte vengeance wold he on f>am take, 
pe folk ful fast pan pcder soght 
And to pg warlaus wirschip wroght. 

And sdne when Saint Andrew herd tell 
Of pat foul fare how it bifell, 
pedir ful playnli gun he pas. 

And pus sayd^ unto Egeas: 

' Sen pdu covaytes pat folk pe ken 
Als domesman pver al oper men, 
pan suld pdu knaw in dede and stevyn 
pi domesman, pat es God in hevyn, 
pat sal pe deme efter pT dfde. 

Him for to knaw now war it nede; 

* &, as often, ® he sayd. 


5 


10 


15 


30 





II. THE NORTHERN DIALECT 

He es J>I God and gver all mighll, 

And all uper er fals maumetrl; 

Him for to honilre evermore pc awe 
And verraily for pi God him knawe. 

And diaw ]n liert frg devils oway, 5 

pat ]§uis to pine pat lastes ay/ 

Kgeas pan answerd ogayne : 

•j)ir wurdes/ he sayd, ‘er all in vayne, 

And nothing suth pou tels me till 

pat may I prove by propir skill; 10 

For, %\hi!s 5owre God pat on call 

Pr^chid pc jtdple in erth pvcrallj 

And Ifjchid his men pat with him dweld 

To prfehe pe same pat pou here teld, 

Omang pe Jews ^ here tane was he 15 

And na}!t_d and hanged high on tre; 

And had he bene God, als pou says, 

It had noght bene sp, by np ways, 
pilrfpre 1 say, pir wurdes er vayne/ 

Saint Andrew pan answerd ogayne: 20 

‘And pou kouth klerely knaw and se 
J?e vertu of pat ilk haly tre 
pat named es pe cros in land, 
pan wald pou wdt and understand 
How Jesu*' CrTst, my maystir fre, 25 

Bi r^sonable cans of charite. 

And for pete pat he bad in mynde 
Of pe grfte meschevys of mankynde, 

Pa}n of pe cros he put® him till, 

Noght mawgre his, hot with his will.' 30 

Egeas pan unto pis thing 
Answerd als in grfte hf thing; 


^ lews. 


® Ihn, as nsual. 


** pattedt 



DEATH OF SAINT ANDREW 


^37 


He sayd, ‘How may ] 30 u say {?ir sawes, 

Sen pSLt ]?Tself pe suth wele knawes ? 

At pc first time bitrayd was he, 

And thurgh ane of his awin mfn^e, 

And sethin takin with Jewes' kene, 5 

And bunden and led furth ]3am bitwene 
To Cayfas hall ]5e graythest gate, 

And frg )?e]3in unto Sir Pilate ; 
pQre was he demid on cros to hang, 

Als pe Jews ordaned® J>am omang. lo 

Maugre his J?ai gun him spill, — 

How proves pou pan it was his will?' 

Saynt Andrew says, ‘His will it was, 
pat may I prove wele gr 1 pas; 

Of his mfn3e miself was ane® 15 

In pe same time when he was tane\ 

And bifgr pe time he was bitrayd 
Unto us all samyn pus he sayd, 

How he suld for mans syns be said®. 

And suffer paynes fnl manyfalde® 20 

And dy on pe cros right als pou tels. 

For h|le of mans sauls and for noght*^ els, 

And on pe thrid day ful right uprise. 

pir wurdes he tplde us on pis wise; 

parfpre I tell pe in pis stfde, 25 

pat with his will he sufferd dfde.’ 

Egeas pan thoght grfte dispite, 

And to Saint Andrew ^d he tite : 

‘pou haves Igrd® of a symple skole, 
pi prfching proves piself a foie; 30 

For, whethir it war his will or npne, 
pou grauntes pat he on cros was done, 

^ lews, ^ ordand ® one. * tone. * sold. • manyfolde, 
^ nght. * lerid. 



13 ^ 


//. THE NORTHERN DIALECT 

And hangici he was als I said are; 

And Jjarf^re Ifve ]?at lurdans lare 
And untu my goddes offrand make. 

Or els 1 sail for }>I God sake 

Ger hang }?e right on sw^ilk a tre 5 

Als J^uii sais suld S9 honorde be. 

For fouler d§de may np man have, 
parfore on pe I \duche it save/ 

Saint Andrew pan, withduten ire, 

Said, ^Sertis pat es my mgste desire. 10 

I wold be wurtln for his sake 

Opon a cros my d<]de to take; 

purtd ever sal I r^dX be 

For any payn pou may do me/ 

£geas pan, with grfte envy, 15 

Sent efter al his turmentry, 

And bad pam smertly pam omang 
Ordan a cros him for to hang, 

And fest parto b^th hend and fete 

pat n9ne of pam with oper mete. 20 

'Festes liim with npne nayles, I rede, 

To ger him hastilX be sg df de, 

Bot blndes him to with rapes Strang 
S§ pat he may be pyned lang.' 

To do his biding war pai bayne; 25 

A cros pai made with al paire maine. 

And handes on him pan fast pai fest, 

To do him payne pai war ful prest. 
pai led him thurgh pat cete 

To pe stfde whSre he suld^ hanget be. 30 

And al pe folk pat dweld obdut* 

Gedird tdg^’der in ful grfte rout, 


* he, not in MS. 


® 3)are obont. 



DEATH OF SAINT ANDREW 


And al J>us said }jai J?am omang : 

‘ Allas, yis wirking es al wrang ; 

What has J>is right wis man done ill 
pat 5 e on pis wise will him spill? 
pis ngbill man pat never did mis 
Ful sakifs suffers he all pis ; 

Ful saklfs bese he done on rode. 

And saklfs sail men spill his blode. 

For he has ever bene blith and glad 
To mend al men pat mister had/ 

Saint Andrew pan pe puple praid, 
And al pus unto pam he sa^’d : 

* Wendis ogayn, all 1 50 W pray, 

And lettes me noght of joy * pis day ; 
Desturbes noght now mi passibun. 

For unto blis it makes ijje bbun/ 

And sone when Saint Andrew bihelde 
pe cros bifgr him in pe felde, 

Unt5 God made he his prayere, 

And unto pe cros on pis manere 
He cried and sayd with ful high voice: 
^ Hayl be pou, lialy and blisced croyce, 
pat haloud es and glprifide® 

With Cristes membris on ilk a side ; 
And honourd es pou with his banes 
Wele, better pan with precius stanes. 
With joyful ® hert 1 cum to pe, 

Sg pat pou gladll resayve me. 

Disciple of him withouten pere 
pat hanged on pe, ml mayster dere. 
Now es pou rfdi mb on to hang, 
pat I in hert have coyayt lang; 


^ ioy- 


ever glorifide. 


ioyfnk 



t 40 II. THE NORTHERN DIALECT 

I have pc lufde with hert and will, 

And covayted ever to cum jje till/ 

Bif^r pc cros J>an knelid he doune, 

And )5us he made his orisoune : 

‘A, nybil cros of gr^te bbunte, 5 

Fry erllili men resay ve now me, 

And ^elde rne to my master gude* 

Sy ]>at he may, with milde'* mode, 

I'y ]?e resayve me, J>at he wroght, 

Als he thurgh }?e fry bale me boght; 10 

No better bfdc I have to byd/ 

His yvcimast clythes J3an of he did; 

Tcj fje turmentuiirs he gun j?am bede, 

And bad |5ai suld do furth }>aire dede. 

pe turmen tours, when pis was sayde, 15 

Toke his bodi ^vith bitter brayde; 

Unto pc cros pai gun it bend. 

And festid ful fast bythe fete and hend; 

And all his bodi ful fast pai tend 

Ais Egeas had pam comand. 20 

When he was bunden sy on brede, 

pai lete him hing and hyme pai 5ede. 

Folk gederd ful faste® him obout, 

Of al pat cuntre in grfte rout ; 

He held his Sghen up unto hevin, 25 

And pus lie sayd with joyful stevin: 

'I se mi Lyrd God Alweldand’’, 

And in his sight now here I stand/ 

Opon pe cros p§re quik he hang 

Two days, prfchand pe puple omang; 30 

pat was ful lang swilk payn to fele, 

Bot with Crist was he confort wele. 


^ gude. 


mild. 


® fast. 


* god and alweldand. 



r>EATH OF SAIXT AXDREIV 14I 

Twenti thousand folk wur ]?are ^ 

To here him prfche, \viUi hertes sarc 
When }5e first day till end was went, 

Al piit puple by pne assent 

Til Egeas hous^ fast }>ai ryn. 5 

And said al quik J>ai suld him brin, 

Bot if he tlte gert tak him dduiie 
pat hanged was ogajms resdune. 

He es a rightwts man,’ }3at say, 

‘And wele has done bQth night and day; 10 

A gnde tfcher ever has he bene, 

And mgre suthfast was never sene, 

And suilk a man, sir, for sertayne 

Suld noght suffer sg hard payne; 

parfgre, bot he be tane doun sone, 15 

In fvil tyme J^at dede was done/ 

Egeas dred pe puple wrake. 

And ddun he hight him for to take ; 

And furth he went with pam in hi, 

Bgth he and al hys lurmentxf* 20 

pe folk thrang efter al on a thrum ; 

And when Saint Andrew saw pam cum. 

Of paire cumyng he was noght paid. 

And unto Egeas pus he sayd: 

‘ Whartd cums pdu unto me, 35 

Bot pdu wald trow in Jesu fre. 

And Ifve pi maumetes mgre and les 
And pray to Jesu of forgifnes? 

If pdu will noght on pis wise dd, 

Ryn fast gr vengeance cum pe to. 30 

pdu gettes ng force ne ng fuysdune 
T 5 negh my bodi ne tak it ddune ; 


J>ore. 


sore. 


® hows. 



JL THE NORTHERN DIALECT 


Lprd will len to me ]:>at lane 
pat quik sail 1 noght doun be tane/ 
pan turmenturs, with fgir mode 
Went to him, als pai war wode. 
pai rugget at him with ful grftc bir, 
Bot nothing might pai of him stir ^ ; 
paire armes and handes sone in hi 
Als pai war herdes, W’ex pai dri; 

Als pai kest up paire armes him till, 
Als dry stykkes pan slode pai still. 

Saint Andrew pan made his praycre 
To mighty God on pis mane re. 

He said, ‘ Lgrd, if it be pi will. 

In pis sl^de let me hing still, 
pat ngne have power me to fell 
Doun of pis cros pat I on dwell. 

Unto pat tyme piself vouche save 
To pe blis of hevin me for to iiave ; 
Bot lat me hing still als I do, 

Til tyme pou tak ml saul pe to.' 

When pis w’as said, par come a light 
Doun frg pe hevyn with bfmis bright. 
And umbilappid his bodi about 
pe folk parfgre had mekil ddut; 
pai might noght luke for mekil light 
Unto his bodi, sg was it bright 
And als pe light was alpirmaste, 

To God in hevyn he gaf pe gaste, 
Egeas was ful dredand pan, 

And for ferde fast hgme he ran; 

Bot in pe way, gr he come liame. 

He suiSerd dfd with mekeP schame. 


* of stir. 


inyk«L 



RICHARD ROLLS 143 

Sg Sudan sorous war to him sent, 

Als wurthi was, to y/g he went. 

Saint Andrew saul witli angell stevyn, 

And with })at light was lift ^ to hevyn 

Wh^re he lendes in ay lastand blis; 5 

Ahveldand God ]?eder us wis. 

Egeas had a wurthll wife 
pat lufed Saint Andrew in his life; 

For him scho ordand a monument, 

And berid his bodi with trew entent. lo 

And of his grave, als men might se. 

Sprang up oyle ful fayre plente 
pat medcyn was to mgre and les, 
pat fieder soght for sere sekenes. 

And by ] 5 at oyl, als says pQ boke^ 15 

A 1 pat cuntre ensaumpie toke; 

For, when it sprang on sides sere, 
pan hppid pai for to have gude ^ere 
Of corn and fruyt and oper thing; 

And when pai saw it skarsli spring, 20 

pan hppid pai to have skant of com, 

And of fruyt, als I sayd biforn. 


III. TREATISES OF RICHARD ROLLE OF HAMPOLE 
I. On the JS'ature of the Bee. 

The bee has thre kyndis. Ane es pat^ scto es never ydill, and 
scho es noghte with thaym pat will noghte wyrke, hot castys 
thaym owte and puttes thaym awaye. Anothire es pat, when scho 25 
fiyes, scho takes erthe in hyr fete* pat scho be noghte lyghtly 
pverheghede in the ayere of wynde. The Ihyrde es that scho 
^ lifted. * buke. ^ h ^ oftai. * fette. 



//. THE NORTHERN DIALECT 


144 

kepes cl§n and bryghte hire wynges. Thus, ryghuyse men J?at 
lufes God are never in ydillnes: for^ owthire ]?ay ere in travayle, 
prayand or thynkande or rGdande or othere gude doande, or 
■wjthtakand^ ydill mene, and schewand thaym worthy to be put 
fra ) 3 e ryste of hevene for thay will noghte travayle here, pay 5 
take erthe, pat es pay halde pamselfe vile and erthely that thay be 
noghte blawene with pe wynde of vanyte and of pryde, Thay kepe 
thaire wynges clf ne ; that es, pe ttva commandementes of charyte 
pay fulfill in gud concyens, and thay hafe dthyr vertus imblendyde 
with pG fylthe of syne and undone luste. Aristotill sais pat pe bees 10 
are feghtande agaynes h} m pat will drawe paire hony fra thaym ; 
swa sulde we do agaynes devells pat afforces tham t 5 rfve 
fra us pe hony of povre lyfe and of grace. For many are pat never 
kane halde in^ pe ordyre of lufe ynesche paire frendys,sybbe or frem- 
ede, bot outhire pay lufe paym ^vermekill or thay lufe pam pverlyttill, 15 
settand thaire Ihoghte unryghtwysely on thaym, or pay lufe thaym 
9verlyttill yf pay doo noghte all as pey wolde till pame. Swyike 
kane noghte fygbte for thaire hony, forthy pe develle tumes it to 
wormes, and makes peire saules oftesythes full bitter in angwys 
and tene, and besynes of vayne thoghtes and oper wrechidnes ; 20 
for thay are 39 hevy in erthely frenchype pat pay may noghte flee 
intill pe lufe of Jesu * Criste, in pe w’ylke pay moghte well forgaa 
pe lufe of all crfatui^ lyfande in erthe. Wharefpre, accordandly, 
Arystotill sais pat some fowheles Sre of gude flyghyng, pat passes 
fra a land to anothire. Some are of ill fiyghynge for bevynes of 25 
body and for paire neste es noghte ferre fra pe erthe. Thus es it 
of thaym pat turnes pam to Godes servys. Some are of gude 
fiyghynge for thay fiye fra erthe to hevene, and lystes tha>Tn thare 
in ihoghte, and are fedde in delite of Goddes lufe and has thoghte 
of na lufe of pe w^oride. Some are pat kan noghte fiye fra pis 30 
lande, bot in pe waye late theyre herte ryste, and delytes ^ paym in 
sere lufes of mene and womene, als pay come and gaa, n^e ane 

* ff for cap f, as occasionally. * wttakand ; as often for with. 

® in, not in MS. * Ihn, as always. * dalyttes. 



RICHARD ROLLE 


145 


and nowe anothire. And in Jesu Cristc fjay kan fynde na swettnes ; 
or if ]?ay any tyme fele oghte it es swa lyttill and swa schorte, for 
othire thoghtes J)at are in thaym, ]?at it brynges thaym till na 
stabylnes. Or f>ay are lyke till a fowle J)at es callede strucjo, or 
storke, ]3at has wenges and it may nogbte flye for charge of bod}% 5 
Swa }?ay hafe undirstandynge, and fastes and wakes and semes 
haly to mens syghte, bot thay may noghte flye to lufe and con- 
templacyone of God, J)ay are sg chargede wyth othyre affeccydns 
and othire vanytes. 

II, A Notabill Tretys off the Ten Comandementys 
Drawene by Richerde the Hermyte off Hampull. 

The fyrste coraandement es, ‘Thy Lgrde God ]?du^ sail loule 10 
and til hym anely ]?ou sail serve/ In this comandement es for- 
bgden all mawmetryse, all wychecrafte and charemynge, the wylke 
may do na remedy till any seknes of mane, woman, or bf ste, for 
J3ay erre }?e snarrys of ]>e develle by ]?e whilke he afforces hym to 
dyssayve manekynde. Alswa in J>is comandement es forb§d}Ti to 15 
gyffe trouthe till sorcerye or till dyvynynges^ by sternys, or by 
drfmys, or by any swylke thynges. Astronomyenes byhaldes ]3e 
daye and }>e hdure and Ipe poynte ]?at man es borne in, and undir 
whylke sygne ® he es borne, and ps poynte )?at he begynnes to be 
in, and by Jjire sygnes ^ and ojxir J^ay saye ]?at that ® sail befall pQ 20 
man aftyrwarde ; bot iheyre errdwre es reprdffede of haly doctours. 
Haly crosses men sall^iowte for thay are in sygne* of Cry ste 
crucyfxede. To ymages ** es ]?e lovynge Jjat es till thaym of whaym 
})ai * are Ipe ymages ; for |)at entent anely ]>ai * are for to lowte; 
The tothire com^dement es, ‘ pdu sail noghte take pe name 2 5 
of God in vayne/ Here es forb^ene 5 the withowttene chfsdn. 

He pat nevenes God and swfris fals, dispyses’ God, In thre 
manors mane may syne in swf rynge ; that es, if he sw?re agayne 

^ * dyvynyngej. * syngne. * syugncs, ® >ay say that ; 

repetition of preceding, * J^aire. ymagej, ^ despyse. 



X46 n, THE NORTHERN DIALECT 

his concyence, or if ht* sw^re be Crysle wondes or blude, that es 
evermare gr^t sync Jjofe it bo sOlhe that he sw^ris, for it sounes in 
irreverence^ of Jesu Crystc. AIs^, if hd com agaynes his athe, 
noght fulfilland }?at he has sworne. The nam of God es takyn in 
vayne one many maners, — with lierte, with inoulhe, with werke. 5 
With herte takes false cry^lyn mene it in vayne, }>at rescheyves J^c 
sacrement wilhouttene grace in sawle. With mouthe es it tane 
in vayne with all aihes brfkynge; of new prfchvnge J^at es vanyte 
and undev^cyone j pray ere when we honour God with bure lippes 
and oure hert}s erre ferre fra hym. With werke ypo^ittes takes lo 
Goddes nam in vayne, for they feyne gud dede withowttene, and 
|?ey erre witlibwtten charyte and vertue and force of sawle to 
stand agayne all ill styrrynges. The thirde comandement es, *Um- 
belh)’nke the j^at thou halow'c halydaye/ This comandement 
may be lakyn in ihre maneres: firste^ generally, ]mt we sesse of 15 
all vyces; sithen, special!, }3at we sesse ot alle bodlli werkis * }?at 
lett) s devpeyone to God in prayenge and Ihynkynge ; the thyrdc 
es specyall, als in contcmplaytyfe men J^at d^artis^ J>ayin fra all 
werdly thynges swa j^at fey haly * gyfe ]?ayin till God. The fyrste 
tnanere es nedfull us to do, the tothire we awe 16 do, the thirde 20 
es perfeccyune ; Ibrlhi, one fc halydaye men aw’e, als God byddys, 
to Iffe all syne and do na werke |>at lettis thaym to gyffe fairc 
herte to Godd, thatt fay halowe fe daye in ryst and devpeyone 
and dedys of charyte. 

The ferthe comandement es, ‘ Honoure thy fadyre and fl modyre.' 25 
That es, in tw^a thynges, fat cs bodyly and gastely: bodyly, in 
sustenance, fat fay be heli)ede and sustaynede in faire aide, and 
when fay are unmyghtty of f aymeselfe ; gastely, in reverence and 
bouxomnes fat fay say to fam na wordes of myssawe, ne un- 
honeste, ne of displfsance unavysedly, bot serve fame mekely 30 
and gladly and lawlyly fat fay may wyne fat Godde hyghte to 
swylke barnes, fat es, lande of lyghte. And if fay be dfde, f aym 

^ irrevence. * ffirste. ® ’ sithen , . . werkis,’ from Arundel MS. 

507. ^ hally. 



RICHARD ROLLE I47 

awe to lieipe J?aire sawies with almousdecles and prayers. The 
hfte comandement es, ]5at ‘Thou slaa na man, nowthire with 
assente, ne with worde or favour.’ And alsg here es forbgden 
unryghtwyse hurtynge of any persone. Thay are slafrs gastely 
J>at will noghte feede ];e pover in nede, and J^at defames men, 5 
and pat confdundes innocentys. The sexte commandement es, 

* Thou sail be na lichoure.’ pat es, thou sail have na man or 
womaiie hot pat pdu has taken in fourme of haly kyrke. Alswa 
here es forbpdene all maner of wilfull pollusyone, procurede one 
any maner agaynes kyndly oys or oper gates. 10 

The sevende comandement es, ‘ Thou sail noghte do na thyfte.’ 

In pe whylke es forbpden all manere of withdraweynge of 5 per 
men thynges wrangwysely agaynes paire wyll pat aghte it, bot 
if it were in tyme of maste nede when all thynges erre comone. 
AIsq here es forbpdene gillery of weghte or of tale, or of mett 15 
or of mfsure, or thorow 5 kyre or violence or drede, als bfdells 
and foresters duse, and mynystyrs of pe kynge, or thurghe ex- 
torcyone as Igrdes duse. The aughtene commandement es, that 
‘Thou sail noghte bfre false wyltnes agaynes thi neghtebdure,' 
als in assys or cause of matremoyne. And alsp lyengcs ere for- 20 
bgden in pis commandement, and forswerynge. Bot all lyenges 
are noght dfdly syn, bot if pay noye till sora man bodyly or 
gastely. The riynde commandement es, ‘ Thou sail noghte covayte 
pe hous or oper thynge, mpbill or immpbill, of pi neghtbour with • 
wrange/ Ne pou sail noghte hald oper mens gude if pdu may 25 
jllde thaym, ellis pi penance saves pe noghte. The tend coinande- 
ment es, ‘ Thou sail noghte covayte pi neghtebours wyefe, ne his 
servande, ne his mayden, ne mpbylls of his.' He lufes God pat 
kepis thire commandements for lufe. His neghtebdur hym awe 
to lufe als hymselfe, pat es, till pd same gude pat he lufes hym- 30 
selfe to, na thynge till ill; and pat he lufe his neghtbour saule 
mare pan his body, or any gudes ^ of pe woride. 

^ gude5* 


L 2 



//. THE NORTHERN DIALECT 


148 


IV. A METRICAL HOMILY—THE SIGNS OF 
THE DOOM 

Today Sain Louk telles us, 

In our godspel, J?at Jesus 
Spac of Jting ]3al es to com, 

And namellc of )>e dai of dom. 

Takning he saide ^ sal be don 5 

Bathe in }?e son and in f?e mon. 

And in J?e stcrnes al biden ; 

And folc sal ]ig\ wandrf]? and ten, 

For folc sal dwln * for din of se 

And for baret ]3at J^an sal be. 10 

Qver al yis werd bes rfdnes, 

Wandr§}3 and uglmes, 

For mihtl gastes of )?e hevin 
Sal be afrayed of J^at stevin ; 

pan sal Crist cum pat men may se 15 

In maistrl and in gr^t pousle. 

Quen pis bigines for to be, 

Lokes up and ye may se ^ L 
pat your biing and your prls 

Ful ner cumen til ward you es. 20 

Himself our biing he es^ caldc, 

For he boht us quen he was saide. 

Quen Crist havid said pis grimll sau, 

An ensampel gan he schau, 

And said, ‘Quen ye se Iffes spring, 25 

And plr tres froit forpe bring, 


* said. 


duin. 


* eb, not in MS. 



SIGNS or THE DOOM 


149 


pan ^vat 30 ' el pat somer es ner ; 

Als may ye wit on pat maner, 

Quen ye se pTr takeninges in land, 
pat Crist es ful ner cumand. 

For hevin and erpe sal passe “ par, 5 

Bot my word passes never mar ’ ; — 

Als qua sai, ping pat I you telle 
Ne mai na miht fordo ne felle. — 

^ Quen pis werld pat I mud of noht 

Sal be gane and til end broht, 10 

pan sal ml word be sopefast. 

For mi kinric sal ever last/ 
pis es pe strenpe of our godspel, 

Als man wip® Inglis tung may teL 

pe maister on pis godspel prfches, 15 

And sais pat Crist parin us tfches 
For to forsak pis werdes winne, 

Ful of wTechedhfd and sinne; 

For Ciist sais us hou it sal end, 

And warnes us ful fair als frend. 20 

He telles us takenm^es snelle, 
par he biginnes his godspelle. 

And sais, ^Kinric sal rohly rise 
Igain kinric and ger men gnse, 

For bale sal ger pir liernes blede, 25 

And mak in land hunger and nede; 
pis bale sal bald baret breu. 

And fel mikel of pis werdes gleu/ 

Slic wordes said Cnst of pIr wers 

pat fblc in werd ful derfe ders^; 3«> 

For quatkin wer sal fal in land. 

Til pover fbik es it sarest scbouand* 

* we. * pas. * wit, as iismak * derf deies. 



Ih THE NORTHERN DIALECT 

pat felis wel nou halT kirk 
pat bers ^ of baret be ful irk ; 

For it and pnver men havis bape 
Of wer and wandrfp" al pe schape. 
pis baret pinnes pover pride, 

Als pai w8l wat pat walkes wide, 

Bot werdes ahte^ and hey tures 
Gftes pir cite men fra stures; 

ForpI riche men ha\is ay iwis, 

Inohe of mft and drinc and blis, 

Bot pover pgles pe baret, 
pat havis defaut of clape and mft 
And forpl warnes Jesus bape, 

Riche and pover, of paire* schape, 
par he schaues in our godspeile 
Takeninges pat bird our pride felle. 

He sais takeninges sal be don 
Bape in pe sone and in pe mon; 
pe sun sal turn intil mirknes, 

As sais Joel, pat bfrs witnes 
Of Crist pat pIr takeninges us schaues 
In our godspeile wip grisli sawes. 

For mon, he sais, sal turned be 
Intil blod pat folk sal se ; 

Quen sun and mon sal pusgat turn, 
pan sal pe sinful sare ® scum, ^ * 

For pan may pai wit witerly 
pat Crist sal com to dem in hi. 

Bot gode* men sal naping dred, 

For pan sal pai be seker of med, 

In pat blisful land pat pai 
Sal ever Hf in gamen and play. 

Camb, MS. reads aght. ® wandreht. ® haht. 

® Ear. • god. 



S/GNS OF THE DOOM 


15^ 


And Ciist in our godspel forJ>y 
Con fortes us ful inildeli. 

And bides us lok til grouand Ires; 

For quen men Igves on J>aim sees. 

Men wat J?at ful ner es somer comand, 5 

And riht swa mai we understand, 

Quen we se J>Ir takenis curae, 
pat nerhand es pe dai of dom. 

Bot for Crist spfkes of takeninge, 
pat tipand of pis dom sal bringe, 10 

ForpI es god pat I you telle 
Sum ping of pir takeninges snelle. 

Sain Jerom telles pat iiften 
Ferli takeninges sal be sen 

Bifpr pe day of dom, and sal 15 

Ilk an of paim on ser dai fab 

pe firste ^ dai sal al pe se 

Boln and ris, and heyer be 

pan ani fel of al pe land, 

And als a felle up sal it stand; 20 

pe heyt parof sal passe pe felles 
Bl sextX fot, als Jerom telles ; 

And als mikel pe toper day 
Sal it sattel and wTt away. 

And be lauer pan it nou esse 25 

For water sal it haf wet lesse, 
pe pride dai, mersuine and qualle. 

And oper grfte* iisies alle, 

Sal yel and mak sa reuful ber 

pat soru sal it be to her. 30 

pe ferpe day, freis ^vater and se 
Sal bren als fir and glouand be. 

^ first. * gret. 



152 


IL THE NORTHERN DIALECT 


1 fift. 

® tend. 

“ al ded, 


pe day, sal grese® and tres 

Su§t blodi deu pat grisli bes. 

pe sexte day, sal ddun falle 

\\'erdes wc^rks, bape tours and halle. 

pG seventl day, sal stanes gr^t 5 

Tugider smit and brGmly bfte. 

And all pe erthe, pe achtande day, 

Sal stir and quae and al folc slay^ 
pe ncyntle * day, pe felles® alle 
Be mad al §vin wip erpe salle. 10 

pe tende*^ day, sal folc up crep, 

Ah wode ' men, of pittes dep. 

pe elleft day, sal banes rise 

And stand on graves par men nou lies. 

pe tuelfie"' day, sal sternes falle. 15 

pe pretend day, sal men'-^ dey alle, 

Wip dper dfde^® men lo rise, 

And com wip paim to grft asise. 
pe faurtend day, at a schift, 

Sal bape brin, bape erpe and lift. 20 

pe flfetende day, pai bape 

Sal be mad newe and fair ful rape; 

And alle dfde^* men sal rise, 

And cum bifgr Crist our justise. 

pan sal Crist dem als king ful wis, 25 

And ger pe sinful sare grise; 

Sa gristi sal he to paim be, 

pat paim war lever pat pai mobt fle 

Fra pat dom pat he sal dem 

pan al pis werd; sa bes he brem 30 

® greses. * Small reads slay. * neynd. ® fels. 

^ uod. * tiielft. ®queknien. ^’^ded. 



SIGNS OF THE DOOM 


^53 


Till }>aim J?at sinful cumes ]?ar; 

And for]?! sal J?ai grete^ sar, 

And say ' Allas, J^at we wSr born, 

Schamlic haf we us self forlorn/ 

pan salle pair wike dedes alle 5 

Stand and paim igaines® kalle, 

And wip pair takening bfr witnes 
Of pair sin and pair waknes. 

Of mikel soru sal pal telle. 

For Satenas wip feres felle, 10 

To bind paim he sal be ful snelle, 

And bremli drawe® paim till belle; 
par pai sal evermare duelle, 

And wafullic in pines welle, 

And endelfs of soru telle. * 15 

pis bes pair dom pat her in sin 
Ligges, and wil pair sin noht blin ; 

Bot wald pai pink on domesdai, 
paim birde^ l§f pair plihtful play. 

Allas, alias, quat sal pai say 20 

Bifpre® him, pat mihtful may, 

Quen al pe men pat was and esse 
Sal se pair sines mare and lesse, 

And ail pe angeles of pe hevin, 

And ma fendes pan man mai nefen? 25 

Igainsawe may par nan be, 

Of ping pat alle men may se. 

Of pis 9penllc schauing 

Havis Godd schawed many takning®; 

Of a tabling ^ I haf herd telle, 30 

pat falies wS til dur godspelle. 

* griet. ^ igaines ^aim. * draw- * bird- ^ bcfenr. 

* t^ng. ^ taking that. 



3^54 


//. THE NORTHERN DIALECT 


A blak munk of an abbaye 
Was enfermer, als 1 herd say * ; 

He was haklen an ball man 
Imangc bis felaus everilk an. 

An cloj’ster monk loved him ful wel* 5 

And was til him ful special, 

For rivelTc togider drawes 
Faijjful frendes and god felawes‘. 

Fel auntour })at J>is enfermer 

Was sek, and he ]?at was him ^ der lo 

Cum 15 mak him glad and bl!j?c, 

And his lufredene til him to k!)?e; 

He asked him hou he him felid, 

And he his stat alle lil him telld, 

And said, ‘Ful harde* fel I me, 15 

To dfde 1 drawe als ye mat se/ 

His felau was for him sary, 

And praied him ful gem for]}Te, 

pat yef Godd did of him his wille 

pat he suld scheu his stat him tille, 20 

pis seke monk hiht to com him to, 

Yef he moht gete l|f parto; 

^ 1 sal/ he said, ‘ yef I may, 

Com to pe, my stat to say.’ 

Quen pis w^as sayd he deyed son, 25 

And his felau asked his bon, 

And praj’ed Godd, for his mercye, 
pat he suld schew him ppenly, 

Qj?er wakand or slepand, 

Of his felawe ® sum tipand ; 30 

And als he lay apon a niht, 

* of all i herd say ; Camb. MS. als i herd say. * faithe lufreden god 

felawes ; Camb. MS. faithefulle frendes & felaus* ® til him. bard. 

^ felaw state ; Camb, MS. omits state. 



SIGNS OF THE DOOM 


^55 


His felaw com \vi}> lemes liht, 

And tald him baj^e of hevin and belle. 

And he prayed he suld him telle 

His state; and he said, ‘AVel far 1, 

poru Ipe help of oiir Lffdl; S 

War scho nafd ^ ben, I hafid gan 

To won in helle wip Satan/ 

His felau poht herof ferly. 

And asked him quarfpr and quT, 

And sayd, ' We wend alle wel pat pou lo 

Haved ben an hall man til ndu ; 

Hou sal it far of us kaytefes 
pat in sin and foil lyfes^ 

Quen pou pat led sa hall life 

Was demed till helle ® for to drife ? ' X5 

Quen pis was said, pe dfd ansuerd 
And tald his felaw Hou he ferd ; 

And said, " Son, quen I gaf pe g3ste. 

Till my dom was 1 led in haste, 

And als I stod my dom td her 20 

Bif9r Jesus, wip dreri cher, 

Of fendes herd ic man! upbrayd. 

And a hoc was bif^r me layd 
pat was pe reuel of Sain Benet, 
pat ic hiht to bald and get. 
pis reul pax gert me rapli rede; 

And als I red, sar gan 1 drede. 

For pverldp ^ moht 1 mac nSn, 

Bot of pe clauses everilk an 

Yald ic account, hou I paim held, 30 

And my consciens gan me meld. 

It schawed p§.r ful ppenlye 
pat 1 led mi lif wTangwisIIe; 

» ne hafd. * lyes. ® tille helL * Camb. MS. oTcrlepe, 



156 If. THE NORTHERN DIALECT 

For in J?e reul os inani pas 
pat pan igaiu me casten was, 

Quarporii almast lja\ed I pare 
Ben tlemM til lielle for tu fare, 

Bot for I lufed wel uiir Lt;fdye 5 

Quil I lifd, ic hafd forple 

Ful gt'd help par, poru hir mercy. 

For sc ho bisoht CiTst inwardlle 
pat J raoht in purgatorle 

Clens nil sin and ml folye. 10 

Forpi hpp I til far ful wele^ 

For mi soru sal son keie; 

ForpT, my frend, I praie® pe, 
pat pou ger felaus prai for me.’ 

Quen pis was said, awai he went, 15 

And his felawe ful mikel him merit, 

And efter pis siht mam a dai 
Gcrt he for his sawell prai. 
pis tale ® haf I tald you 

To schaw on quat maner and hou 20 

We sal be demed, and yeld acdunt 
Quat our sinnes mai amount; 

For al sal com to rdunge iwis, 
par pat her mistakin isse 

Bi pe I^ste^ idel poht, 25 

For par forgifnes bes riht noht. 
pan sal we bye pe sines dere 
Of quilke we er noht schriven here; 

Yef we be her of sines schriven, 

par havis Godd us paim forgiven, 30 

Forpi birdd us our sin her bete 

Wip schrift of mdupe and wgnges wete. 

* prai 


^ Welle. 


8 tab 


* lest. 



SONGS OP MINOT 


157 


For schrift of mouJ>c es medecme 
jpat schildes man fia hcII^pTn, 

For if we schrlf us clfn of sinne 
Wi]:) penans^ d§d we sal haf winnc, 

And mai be siker on domesdai 5 

To wind intil J^at blisful plai, 
par Crist sal ever mar be king; 

For his merci he pider us bring. Amen. 


V, THE SONGS OF LAWRENCE IMINOT 


L 

Lithes and 1 sail tell 50W tyll 

pe bataile of Halidon HylL 10 

Trew king pat sittes in tr^ne, 

Unto pe 1 tell my tale. 

And unto pe 1 bid a bone. 

For pou ert bute of all my bale. 

Als pdu made inidelfrd and pe mone, 15 

And bestes and fowdes grfte and smale. 

Unto me send pi socore sone 

And dresce my dedes in pis dale. 

In pis dale I drdu|x: and dSre 

For derne” dedes pat done me dfre; 30 

Of Ingland had my hert grfte care 
When Edward founded first to wfre 
pe Franche men war frek to fare 
Ogaines him with scheld and spf re ; 
pai turned ogayn with sides sare, 25 

And al paire pomp noght worth a pfre. 

^ penanz. ® dem. 



IL THE NORTHERN DIALECT 


A p^re of prise es m^re sumtyde 
pan ail bpste of Normandje ^ 
pai sent )3aire schip])es on ilk a side 
With flesch and ^\Ine and whfte and rye 
With licrt and hand, es noght at hide. 

For to help Scotland gan pai bye ; 
pai fled and durst ng dede abide 

And all paire fare noght wurth a five. 

For " all paire faie pai dinst noght fight, 
For d§dcs dint had pai siike ddut ; 

Of Scodand had pai never sight 
Ay >vhils pai war of wordes stout, 
pai wald have infnd pam at paire might 
And besy war pai pare obout; 

Now God help Edward in his right, — 
Amen, — and ail his rfdy rd\\’t. 

His rfdy rout mot Jesu^ spede. 

And save pam b^th by night and day; 
])at L^rd of hevyn mot Edward Ifde, 

And maint^ne him als he wele may. 
pe Scottes now all wide will sprfde; 

For pai have failed of paire pray; 

Now er pai dareand all for drede, 
pat war bif^re sg stout and gay. 

Gai pai war, and wele pai thoght 
On pe Erie Morre and oper ma; 
pai said it suld fui dere be boght 
pe land pat pai war flemid fra. 

Philip Valays wordes wroght, 

And said he suld paire enmys sla; 

Bot all paire wordes was for noght, 
pai mun be met if pai war ma. 

' Norronndye. * habide. ® ffor, * Ihu, as usual. 



SONGS or MJNOT 


3E5& 

Ma manasinges have }?ai maked, 
rvlawgre mot ]:>ai have to mede ; 

And many nightes als have }5ai waked 
To dfre all Ingland with J^aire dede, 

Bot, loved be God, J^e pride es slaked 5 

Of J)am Ipat war sp stout on stede ; 

And sum of J)am es Ifvid all naked 
Noght fer frg Berwik opon Tw^ede. 

A lltcll frp J^at forsaid toune, 

Halydon Hill J)at es pe name, lo 

pare wras crakked many a crowne 
Of waide * Scottes and als " of tame, 
pare w^as paire baner born all doune. 

To mak sllkc bpstc pai w^ar to blame ; 

Bot neverpelfs ay er pai boune 15 

To wait Ingland with sorow and schame. 

Shame pai have als I here say ; 

At Donde now es done pai re daunce, 

And wend pai most andper way 

!gv3*n thurgh Flandres into France. 20 

On Filip Valays ® fast cri pai, 

pare for to dwell and him avaunce; 

And nothing list pam pan of play 
Sen pam es tide pis sary chance- 

pis sary chaunce pam es bitid, 35 

For pai war fals and wonder fell; 

For cursed caitefes er pai kid 
And ful of trfson, suth to tell. 

Sir Jpn pe Comyn had pai hid. 

In haly kirk pai did him qwell ; 30 

And parfpre many a Skottis brid 

With dole er dight par* pai most dw^L 
1 wild. » alls. 3 Valas. * 



l6o 


//. THE NORTHERN DIALECT 


pare dwelled dure king, pc suth to saine, 

With his ni§n5e a lltell while; 

He gaf gude confort on pat plaine 
To all his men obout a myle. 

All if his men war mekill of maine, 5 

Ever pai dduted pam of gile; 
pe Scottes gaudes might nothing gain, 

For all pai stumbilde at pat stile. 

pxis in pat stowre pai left paire live 

pat war bifyre s§ proud in prfse; lo 

Jesu'\ for pi woundes five, 

In Ingland help us to have pfse. 

11 . 

Now for to tell 50W will I turn 
Of pe ^ batayl of Banocburn. 

Skottes out of Berwik and of Abirdene, 15 

At pe Bannok burn w5r 50 t5 kene; 

pare slogh many saklfs, als it was sene, 

And ^6w has King Edward wrpken it, I wene. 

It es W'rpken, I wene, wele wurth pe while; 

War jit with pc Skottes, for pai er ful of glle. 20 

Whare er jc, Skottes of Saint Jghnes tdune? 
pe bpste of jowre baner es bftin all doune; 

When je bpsting will bede. Sir Edward es boune 
For to kindel jow care and crak jowre crowne. 

He has crakked jowre croune, w§le worth pe while; 25 
Shame bityde pe Skottes, for pai er full of gile. 

Skottes of Striflin w'ar stern® and stout, 

Of God ne of glide men had pai np doSt; 

^ * Ihu, as usual. ^ no J)e in MS. ® steren. 



SONGS or MINOT 


i6t 


Now have J^ai, J?e pelers, priked obout, 

Bot at pe last Sir Edward rifild baire rout; 

He has nfild fjaire rout, wHe wurth Jx* while* 

Bot ever er J)ai under bot gaudes and gile. 

Rughfute riveling, mjw kindels pi care, 5 

Bf rebag with J?I bgste, pi biging es bare; 

Fals wretche and forsworn, whider wilt ou fare ? 

Busk J>e unto Brughes ^ and abide J^are ; 

pare, wretche, salt ou won and wery pe while, 
pi dwelling in Donde es done for pi glle. 10 

pc Skotte" gase in Burghes and bftcs pc stretes, 

All pise Inglis men hai mes he hetes ; 

Fast makes he his m^ne to men pat he metes, 

Bot f§ne frendes he findes pat his bale betes: 

Fune betes his bale, wele wurth pe while, 15 

He uses all thrfting with gaudes and glle. 

Bot many man thrftes and spfkes ful ill 
pat sumtyme war better to be stanestill; 
pe Skot in his wordes has wind for to spill, 

For at pe last Edward sail have al his will : 20 

He had his will at BerwTk, wele worth pe while ; 
Skottes broght him pe kayes, bot gft for paire glle. 

HI, 

How Edward pe King come in Braband 
And toke homSge of all pe land* 

God pat schdpe bpth sf and sand, 25 

Save Edward, King of Ingeland®, 

Bpthe** bodJ% saul and life, 

And grante him joy withowten strif; 

^ Brig. ^ skottes. * .Ingland. * botlu 


H 



//. THE NORTHERN DIALECT 


For mam men to liim er wrath ^ 

In Frauiice and in Flandics bath 
For he defcndes fast 3 ns right. 

And }?arto Jesu grante him might. 

And to do both night and day, 

Jhit may be to Goddes pay. 

Oure King was cumen, Irewly^ to tell. 
Into Brabant for to dwell, 
pe kajser Lo\\is of Bavere, 

])at in ]?at land J?an had no pere, — 

He, and als his sones** twa^ 

And oJ)cr princes many ma®; — 
Bisschoppcs and prelates war J>are ffle 
pat had ful mekill werldly wfle, 

Princes and pople, aid and 5ung‘, 

Al pat spac with Duche tung, — 

All j^ai come with grgte honowre 
Sir Edward to save and socoure, 

And proferd him, with all pajre rfde, 

For to hald pe Kinges slfde, 
pe duke of Braband first of all 
Swore, for thing pat might bifall, 
pat he suld, b9th day and night, 

Help Sir Edward in his right. 

In toun, in ftdd, in frith and fen ; 
pis swore pe duke and all his men. 

And al pe Iprdes pat with him lend, 

And parto held pal up paire hend. 
pan King Edward toke his rest 
At Andwerp, whare him liked best; 

And pare he made his mone playne 
pat np man suld say pare ogayne; 

* ■wroth. ® both. * trely- * sons. 

* mo. ^ 5ong. 



SONGS OF MINOT 


163 


His mone ]?at was gude and lele 
Left in Braband ful mekill dele ; 

And all ]?at land untiil ]?is day 
Fars Jje better, for J^at jomay. 

When Philip pe ^"alays^ herd of J^is, 
parat he was ful wrgth iwis; 

He gert assemble his bardunes. 

Princes and Iprdes of many tounes. 

At Pariss toke pai paire counsaile, 

Whilk pointes might pam mgste availe ; 
And in all wise pai pam bithoght 
To stroy Ingland and bring to noght. 

Schipmen sone war efter sent 
To here pe Hinges cumandment. 

And pe galaies men alsa® 

pat wiste^ bgth of wfle and wa^. 

He cumand pan pat men suld fare 
Till Ingland, and for ngthing spare 
Bot brin and sla bgth man and wife 
And childe, pat ngne suld pas with life; 
pe galay men held up paire handes 
And thanked God of pir tipandes. 

At Hamton, als I understand, 

Come pe galayes* unto land. 

And ful fast pai slogh and brend, 

Bot noght sg mekill als sum men wend; 
For, gr pai wened war pai mett 
With men pat sone paire laykes lett. 

Sum was knokked on pe h§vyd 
pat pe body pare bilfvid; 

Sum lay stareand on pe sternes. 

And sum lay kngked but paire hernes; 

* also. 

® gaylayes. 

M 2 


o 


10 


15 


2Cf 


25 


30 


1 Yalas. 


* wist. 


4 


wo. 



//. THE NORTHERN DIALECT 


pan with pam was n^ne oper gle, 

Dot All fain war pai pat might fle. 
pc galay men, pe suth to say, 

I\Iost nddes turn anoper way; 
pai soght pe strfmis fer and wide 
In Flandres and in Sgland syde. 

pan saw’ pai whare Cristofer stode 
At Aremduth*, opon pe fiode®; 
pan went^ pai peder all bidene, 
pe galayes men with hertes kene, 

Aght and fourti* galays and ma^ 

And with pam als war tarettes twa®, 

And oper many of gali^tes, 

With grfte noumber of smale bptes ; 

All pai h§ved on pe fiode 
To stfle Sir Edward mennes^ gode. 
Edward dure King pan was noght pere, 
Bot sdne "when it come to his ^re 
He sembled all his men full still, 

And said to pam what was his will. 

Ilk man made him redy pen; 

Sp w’ent pe King and all his men 
Unto paire schippes ful hastily, 

Als men pat war in dede doghty. 
pai fand pe galay men grfte wane®, 

A hundereth ever ogaynes ane®; 
pe Inglis men put pam to wfre 
Ful baldely^® with bow and spfre; 
pai slogh pare of pe galaies men 
Ever sexty ogaynes ten, 
pat sum iigges ^it in pat mire, 

All hfvidl^ withdwten lure, 

araa»nth. * Unde. * wen, * viii and xl. * mo. 
^ mens. * wone. • one. baldly. 



SON.GS OF MINOT 


165 


pe Inglis men war armed wele 
Bgth in yren and in stele; 
pai faght ful fast, b^th day and night, 

AIs lange* als pam lasted might; 

Bot galay men war 39 many 
pat Inglis men wex all wery; 

Help pai soght bot pare come nane®, 
pan unto God pai made paire mane’. 

Bot sen pe time pat God was born, 

Ne a hundreth jere bifom. 

War never men better in fight 
pan Inglis men, whils pai had myght, 

Bot sone all maistri gan pai mis; 

God bring paire saules untill his blis, 

And God assoyl pim of paire sin 
For pe gude will pat pai war in. Amen. 

Listens now, and leves me, 

Whosp lifes pai sail se 
pat it mun be fill dere boght 
pat pir galay men have wroght. 20 

pai hpved still opon pe flode, 

And rfved pover men paire gode * ; 
pai robbed and did mekill schame. 

And ay tere Inglis men pe blame. 

Now Jesus® i^ve all Ingeland*, 25 

And blis it with his haly hand. Amen. 

lang. ® none. * stone. * gude. ’ Ihc. * Ingland. 




i66 


/A THE NORTHERN DIALECT 


VI. BARBOUR’S BRUCE— THE PURSUIT OF 
KING ROBERT 


How J^lin of Lome soucht )pe gud Kyng Robert Bruce wyth 
J5e sleuth hund. 

pE kyng toward pc wod^ is ganc, 

Wery, forswat, and will of wayn;’ 

Intiil p 5 wod soyn enterit he. 

And held him^ ddun toward a vale 

Quhar throu pe wod a wattir ran. 5 

piddir in grft hj? w’ent® he pan 

And begouth rest hym pair, 

And said he mycht® n§ forpinnar. 

His man said, ‘Schir®, pat may nocht’' be; 

Abyde 5he heir, je sal soyn se ro 

Fifle® hundred! ^arnand 56U to sla, 

And pai ar ffle aganis us twa; 

And sen we may nocht deill wyth mycht, 

Help us all pat w'e may wyth slycht.’ 

pe kyng said, ^Sen pat pdu will swa, 15 

Ga furth and I sail with pe ga. 

Bot I haf herd oftslpys*^ say, 

pat quha endlang a wattir ay 

Wald way cl a bowdraucht, he suld ger 

Bath pe sleuthhund and his Ifdar 20 

Tyne pe sleuth men gert him ta; 


* vod ; V for w is comzncm, and occasionally w for v. ® him, not in MS. 
® wend. * for to. ® my*, as often. * 3, and an abbreviation, written 
Schir in other places. ^ no*, as often- ® v, as often. ® oftsiss. 



BARBOUR'S BRUCE 


}>Bine. 


167 

Pruf \ve gif it will do now swa, 

For war ^on devill hund away 
I roucht nocht of J»e layff, pcrfay/ 

As he devisit ]?ai haf done, 

And enterit in ]>q wattir sone 5 

And hHd on endlang it J?dr way; 

And syne to pe land 5eid J)ai 
And held J)air way as J?ai had gre. 

And Jphn of Lorn, with gi§t eff^re, 

Com with his rdiit richt to J>e place 10 

Quhar f>at his fife men slane was. 

He mfnyt ]?ame quhen he faim saw, 

And said, eftir a litill thraw, 
pat he suld venge in by par blude; 

Bot opir wajds pe gammyn 5ude. 15 

pair wald he mak ng mair duelling, 

Bot furth in by followit pe king. 

Richt to pe burn pai* passit ar; 

Bot pe sleuthhund maid stynting par, 

And waveryt lang tyme to and fra 30 

pat he na certane gat couth ga. 

Till at pe last pan J^hne of Lorn 
Persa\it pe hund pe sleuth had lorn, 

And said, ^ We haf tynt pis travale ® ; 

To pas forpir may nocht avale, 35 

For pe wode is batii braid and wyde 
And he is weill fer be pis tyde. 
parfgre 1 rede we turn agane, 

And w’ast n9 mair travale in vayn. 

With pat relyit* he his mfn^he, 

And his way to pe hQst tuk he. 

pus eschapit pe npbill kyng; 

Bot sum men sais pis eschaping^ 

* travell, but cf. U 29. ® releyt, as at 169, 5. ^ tncbaping. 



i68 


//. THE NORTHERN DIALECT 


Apon ane oj^ir maner it fell 
pan ihrou pe wading; for pai tell 
That pe kyng a gud archer had, 

And quhen he saw his Iprd swa stad, 

That he wes left swa anerly, 5 

He ran on fut ahvayis hym by 

Till he intill pe wdd wes gane ; 

pan said he till hymself allane, 

pat he arest rycht pair wald ma 

To luk gif he pe hand mycht sla. 10 

For gif pe hand mycht Ifst^ on lif, 

He wist full wcill pat pai wald drif* 
pe kyngis trass till pai hym ta; 
pan ^\ist he weill pai wald him sia. 

And for he wald his Iprd succour, 15 

He put his Iff in aventur, 

And stud intill a busk lurkand 
Quhlll pat pe hQnd com at his hand, 

And with Sne arrow soyn hym slew 

And throu pe wod syne hym withdrew'. 20 

Bot quhepir his esclmping^ fell 

As 1 tald first, or now 1 tell, 

I wat it weill without Ifsyng, 

At pat burn eschapit pe king. 

pe king furth has his wayis tane, 25 

And Jphne of Lome agane is gane 
To Schir Amer, pat frS pe chass 
With his men pan repSrit wass, 
pat litill sped in pair ebassing ; 

For thow^ pat pai maid following 30 

Full fgirly, pai wan bot small; 
pair fais neir eschapit all. 


’ left? 


® rif. 


* enchaping. 


* how. 



BARBOUR^S BRUCE 


169 


IMen sais Schir Thomas Randale J?an, 

Chassand, f>e kyngis baner wan, 

Quharthrou in Yngland wjth ]?e kjng 
He had rycht grft price and lovyng, 

Quhen pt chaseris relyit war, 5 

And J^hne of Lome had met |?aim par, 

He^ tald Schir Amer all po cass, 

How p2Lt p^ king eschapit was, 

And how J)at he his fiff men slew 

And sme he to ]?e wod hym drew, 10 

Quhen Schir Amer herd ]?is, in hy 

He sanyt hym for J?e ferly, 

And said, ‘He is grftly to priss, 

For I knaw nane poX liffand is 

pat at myscheif can help h}in swa; x$ 

I trow he suld be hard t6 sla, 

And he w 5 r b§dyn all fvynly/ 

On pis w'iss spak Schir Amery. 

And pe gud kyng held furth his way. 

He and his man, ay quhlll pat pai 20 

Passit throu pe forest war. 

Syne in a mur^ pai enterit ar, 

pat wes bath bee' and ® iang and ® braid ; 

And gr pai half it passit had, 

pai saw on syde thre men cumand 25 

Lik to lichtmen and waverand. 

Swerdis pai had and axis als, 

And ane of pame apon his hals 
A mekill bundyn weddir bare. 

pai met pS kyng and halsit par; 30 

And pe kyng pame par halsing ^ald 
And askit pame qnehepir pai wald. 

^ and ; he, in MS. E. * no * and’ in MS. ; E ^as &. * as 

oecaskmally. 



170 


11. THE NORTHERN DIALECT 


pai said, ‘Robert pe Bruce J>ai socht, 
To meit with hym gif pat ]?ai mocht; 
pair duelling with hyni wald pai ma/ 
pe kyng said, ‘ Gif pat ^he will swa, 
Ilaldis furth ^our way with me 
And I sail ger jdw soyn hym se/ 
pai piersavit be his spfkyng, 

And his cfTfr, he wes pe kyng, 

And changit contenanss and lat. 

And htdd nocht in pe first estat ^ ; 

For pai war fayis to pe kyng. 

And thoucht tu cum into sccmkyng, 
And duel! with hym quhlll pat pai saw 
par tym, and bryng hym pan of daM% 
pai grantit till his spek forpi; 

Bot pe kyng, pat wes witty, 

Persavit W'eill be pair havyng* 
pat pai lufit hym in na thing. 

He said, ‘Fallowis, ^he man all thre, 
Forthir aquynt quhiJl pat wg be, 

All be jourself forrouth us^ ga, 

And on pe sammyn wiss we twa 
Sail fallow 5dw bchynd weill neir/ 

Quod pai, ‘Schir, it is na mysteir 
To trow iiitill us any ill/ 

*Nane do 1 / said he, ‘bot I will 
pat jhe ga forrbwth us^, quhlll we 
Betti r with opir knawyn be/ 

‘ We grant/ pai said, ‘ sen ^e will swa/ 
And furth apon pair gat gan*^ ga. 

pus 5eid pai till pe nycht wes neir. 
And pan pe formast cumin weir 


5 


10 


15 


35 


^ stat 


* awyng. 


® us, not in MS. 


”* forrow us. 


can. 



BARBOUR*S BRUCE 


Till a wast husbandis houss, and pRr 
pai slew the weddir at pai bar. 

And slew fyre for to rgst par mft, 

And askit pe kyng gif he wald ft 

And rest hym till pe mft war dicht. 5 

pe kyng, pat hungry wes 1 hicht, 

Assentit to pair speke in hy; 

Bot he said, he wald anerly 
Betuyx hym and his fallow be 

At a fyre, and pai all thre 10 

In pe end of pe houss suld ma 
Ane opir fjTe ; and pai did swa. 
pai drew pame in pe housis end, 

And half pe weddir till hym send ; 

And pai rgstit in hy pair mft, 15 

And fell rycht frfkly^ for till ft. 

pe kyng weili lang he fastyt^ had. 

And had lycht mekill travale made; 
parf§r he fte richt fgyrly. 

And quhen he ftyn had hastely, ao 

He had to slepe sa mekill will 
pat he mycht set na let partill; 

For quhen pe vanys fillit ar, 
pe body worpis hfvy evirmar, 

And to slepe drawis hfvynes*. 25 

pe kyng pat all fortravalit wes. 

Saw pat hym worthit slep neidwais; 

Till his fostir bropir he sais, 

‘ May I trast pe me to wakk 

Till I a lltill slepyng tak?' 30 

^gha, Schir/ he said, ‘till 1 may drey/ 
pe kyng pan wynkit a lltill wey^ 

^ frakly. * fasten. * hev3mas, * walk; lk«kk * we. 



172 


//. THE NORTHERN DIALECT 


And slepit nocht, hot ynkurly 
Gliffnit* oft up suddanly®; 

For he had drede of }?a ^ thre men, 
pat at pe lOpir fyre war pen; 

That pai his fayis war he wyst, 
parfgr he slepit as foul on twist. 

The kyng slepit hot litill^ pan, 
Quhen sic a slcpe fell on his man 
pat he mycht not bald up his e, 

Bot fell on slepe and routit he. 

Now is pe kyng in grft perill®, 

For slepe he swa a litill quhlle, 
lie sail be dfd forduten dred; 

For pe thre tratouris tuk gud hede 
pat he on slep wes, and his man. 

In full grft by pai raiss up pan, 

And drew pair swerdis bSstely, 

And went toward pe kyng in hy 
Quhen pat pai saw he slepit swa, 

And slepand thoucht pai wald hym sla. 
Till hym pai ^eid a full grft pass, 

Bot in pat tym, throu Goddis grace, 
pe kyng blenkit up hastely, 

And saw’ his man slepand him by, 

And saw’ cumand pe tratouris thre. 
Delyverly on fut gat he, 

And drew his swerd out and pame met 
And as he 3eid, his fut he set 
Apon his man weill hfvaly. 

He w’aknyt*, and raiss all desaly; 

For pe sleip masterit hym swa 
That, pr he gat up, Sne of pa ^ 

^ and glufifnyt. * suddandly. ^ })ai, as also in 1. 32 
® pareil. « walknyt. jjai. 



BARBOUR* S BRUCE 


pat com for to sla J>e kyng 
Gaf hym a strake in his rysyng, 

Swa pat he mycht help hym ng mair. 
pe kyng sp st rally stad wes pair. 

That he wes never ^eit swa stad ; 

Na war pe armyng pat he had. 

He had beyn dfd forbiityn w^eyr. 

Bot nocht forpi on sic maneir 
He helpit hym swa in pat bargane, 
pat pa ^ thre tratburis he has slane, 
Throu Goddis grace and his manheid. 

His fostir bropir pair wes ded ; 
pan wes he wounder will of wayii, 

Quhen he saw he wes left allane. 

His fostir bropir mfnyt he. 

And W'aryit all pe topir thre. 

And syne his way tuk hym allane 
And rycht toward his trist is gane- 
pe kyng went furih, wiuth and angry, 
Mfnand his man full tendirly, 

And held his way all hym allane. 

And richt toward pe houss is gane 
Quhar he set trist to mete his men. 

It wes weill lat of nycht be pen; 

He com soyn in pe houss, and fand 
pe gad wif on pe bynk sytand. 

Scho askit hym soyn quhat he wes, 

And quhene® he com, and quhar be gais. 
* A travaliand man, dame/ said he, 

‘That travalys heir throu pe cuntre/ 

Scho said, ‘All pat travaland ere, 

For saik of ane, ar welcom here/ 


I l)ai. 


quhyne. 



JL THE NORTHERN DIALECT 


The kjng said, ‘Gud dame, quhat is Le 
pat garris 50W have sic specialte 
Till men pat travalis?' ‘Schir, perfay, 
Quod pe gud wTf, ‘1 sail ^dw say; 

Gud Kyng Robert pe Bruce is he, 
pat is rycht Igrd of pis cuntre. 

His fayis hym haldis now in thrang, 

Bot I thynk to se, gr oucht lang, 

Hym Iprd and kyng gvr alpe land, 
pat na fayis sail hym withstand/ 

‘Dame, lufis pju hym sa weill?' said he. 
‘gha, Schir,' scho said, ‘sa God me se/ 
‘Dame,' said he, ‘Ig, hym here pe by, 
For I am he/ ‘Sa ^he suthly?' 

‘ gha, certis, dame/ * And quhar ar gane 
gour men, quhen 50 ar pus allane?' 

‘At pis tjhne, dame, I have ng ma/ 

Scho said, ‘It may ng wiss be swa; 

I have twa sonnys wicht and hardy, 
pai sail becum 5 our men in hy/ 

As scho devisit, pai have done; 

His sworn men becom pai sone. 
pe wif gart soyn hym syt^ and ft; 

Bot he had schort quhll at pe mft 
Sittyn, quhen he herd grft stampyng 
About pe hJus; pan, but lettyng, 
pai stert up pe hous to defend 
Bot soyn eftir pe kyng has kend 
James of Douglas ; pan wes he blith, 

And bad oppyn pe dures swith, 

And pai com in, all at pai ware. 

Schir Edward pe Bruce wes pare, 



BARBOUR^S BRUCE 


175 


And James alsua ^ of Douglas, 
pat wes eschapit fra pe chas 
And with pe kyngis bropir met. 

Syne to pe trist pat pame wes set 

pai sped pame with pair cumpany, 5 

That war ane hundreth and fyfty, 

And quhen at pai has seyn pe kyng, 
pai war joyfull of pair metyng, 

And askit how he eschapit was ; 

And he paim^ tald all haill pe cass, 10 

How pe fiff men hym presit fast, 

And how he ^ throu pe wattir past, 

And how he met pe thevis thre, 

And how^ he slepand slayn suld be, 

Quhen he waknyt® throu Goddis grace; 15 

And how his fostyr brdpir was® 

Slayne, he tald pame all haley. 
pan lovyt pai God all comonly, 
pat pair Iprd wes eschapit swa. 


^ als. * hym ; ])aim, MS. E. ® ye. * how, not in MS. 

® valknyt. ® ded wes ; next line then reads, ‘ hus all he tald Jiame 

halely.' MS. E reads ‘was slayne.* 



THE SOUTHERN DIALECT, INCLUDING 
KENTISH 


1. THE POEIMA MORALE, OR MORAL ODE 


IcH sem elder ]?en ich wes a winLre and a Igre ; 

Ic w^lde mgre panne ic diide, ml wit ah to ben mgre. 

Wei lange ic habbe child ibeon a weorde and ^ fch a dgde ; 
PI h ic beo a wintre eald, to ^ ^yng I eom a rfde. 

Unnlit llf ic habb ilSd, and 5 yet me pincp ic Ifde ; 
panne ic me bipenche, wel sgre ic me adrfde. 

Mgst al pat ic habbe ydon ys idelnesse and chilce ; 

Wel late ic habbe me bipoht, bute me God do milce. 

Fele j?dele word ic habbe iqueden, sy^den ic speke cupe, 
And fale ^unge dfde ido pe me ofpinchet nupe. 

AI to Idme ic habbe agizlt, a weorche and gc a worde ; 

Al to miichel ic habbe ispend, to Iitel yleid an horde. 

Mf St al pet me Iicede «r, nu hit me misHchetl ^ ; 
pe mychel fol 3 ep his ywil, him sulfne he biswike& 

Ich mihte habbe bet idon, hadde ic pg yselpe ; 

Nu ic wolde ac ic ne mei, for elde ne for unhelpe ; 

Ylde me is bistolen on ^r ic hit awyste ; 

Ne mihte ic iseon before me for smeche ne for miste. 
iErwe we beop to done god, and to yfele al to priste ; 

Mgre aeie stent man of manne, panne hym do of Criste. 
pe wel ne dep pe hwxle he mei, wel oft hit hym scgel ruwen ; 
pjenne hy mo wen sculen and ripen pgr hi ®r seowen. 

Don gc to gode wet ^e mu^e, pe * hwlle ^e bdp a life ; 

Ne hopie ng man to miichel t5 childe ne to wife ; 


3 


tu. 


* Jja. 


5 


lo 


15 


20 


^ &, as often. 


® mislichet. 



THE POEMA MORALE 


t'Jl 

pe him selve for^iit for wife, 9'Ser for childe, 

He sceal cume an iivele stede, bute him God beo milde. 

Sende ^ch sum god biforen him, pe hwile he mei to heovene ^ ; 
Betere is an elmesse bifore penne beon sefter seovenCc 
Ne beo pe leovre pene pe siilf, pi mei ne tSi ma^e, 5 

Sot is is o&es mannes freond betre pene his a3e. 

Ne hople wif to hire were, ne wer to his wife ; 

Beo for him siilve ^vrich man, pe hwlle he beo alive 
Wis is pe him siilfne bipenctS, pe hwile he mote libbe, 

For sone Willie'S him for^ite pe fremde and pe sibbe. 10 

pe wel ne dep pe hwile he mei, ne sceal he hwenne he wolde ; 
Manies mannes sare iswinch habbeS oft unhdlde. 

Ne scolde nan man don a fiirst, ne slawen wel to done ; 

For man! man bihateS wel, pe hit for^itet sone. 

pe man Se siker wiile beon t 5 habbe Codes blisse, 15 

Do wel him siilf pe hwile he mei, Sen haveS he mid iwisse. 

pes riche men weneS beo siker, purh walle end purh diche; 

He deS his a sikere stede, pe sent to heveneriche ; 

For Sfr ne Sierf beon ofdrfd of fSre ne of peove; 

pfr ne mei hi binime Se laSe ne Se leove ; 20 

par ne paerf he habbe kare of wyfe ne of childe. 

pider we sendet and siilf bereS to lite and to selde ; 

pider we scolden dra^en^and don wel oft and wel ^elome, 

For pfr ne sceal me us naht binime, mid wrancwise dome, 
pider we scolden ^eorne dra^en, wolde ^e me ileve, 25 

For Sfre ne mei hit binimen eow pe king ne se ireve. 
pet betste pet we hedde, piider we scolde sende, 

For pf r we hit mihte flnde eft, and habbe bute ende. 

He pe her deS enl god, for habbe Codes are,^ 

Eal he pit sceal flnde Sfr, and hundredffalde mare. 30 

pe Se ehte wile hf alden wel, pe hwile he mei is ® wfalden, 
give is for Codes luve, penne deS he is wel ihfalden. 

^ bevene. ® dra^an. * his> as twice in next line* 

H 



178 


II. THE SOUTHERN DIALECT 


tire iswinch and ure til^e is oft iwuned t 5 swinden ; 

Ac (Set we d5(S for Godes luve, eft we hit sculen afinden. 
Ne sceai nan iivel beon unboht, ne nan god unfor^olde ; 
tivel we dots eal to michel, and god lesse j^enne we scolde. 
pe Se mfst detS nu to gode, and tSe pe Ifst to laSe, 

^iper to lltel and to michel sceai Sinche eft him ba^e. 
p|r me sceai ure weorkes we5en beforen Hevekinge, 

And ^ieven us ure swinches Ken, sefter ure farninge. 

Jvre flc man mid pan tSe have® mei biggen heverlche, 
pe ^e mare lieftS and tSe pe lesse, bape mei iliche ; 

Eal sf mid his peme sf 'Se ocSer mid his punde ; 

pet is ^ Se ^ wunderlukeste ware Se seni man ^vre funde. 

And pe Se mare ne mei don mid his god ipanke, 

Eal sf wel sf Se haveS goldes feale manke ^ ; 

And oft God kan mare pane San Se him ^ivet lesse 5 
Eal his weorkes and his weies is milce and rihtwisnesse. 
Lite iSc is Gode leof, Se cumeS of gode iwille, 

And fSlfte miichel ^ive Senne Se heorte is ille. 

Hevene and eorSe he oversihS his f5cn beoS swp brihte ; 
Sunne, mone, dei, and fUr biS pUstre tSjeanes his lihte. 

Nis him naht forhole ni hud, swa michel biS his mihte ; 

Nis hit na swa dGrne idon, ne a swa pGstre nihte. 

He wat hwet deS and Senchet ealle quike wihte, 

Nis na hlavotd swilc sf is Ciist, na king swilch ure Drihte. 
Heovene and eorSe and eal pet is biloken is in his hande. 
He deS eal pet ® his wille is, a ’svetere and a lande. 

He makede fisces in Se sf, and fu5eles in Se liifle ; 

He wit and wfaldeS ealle Sing and he scop ealle 5esceafte. 
He is drd abuten drde, and ende abuten ende ; 

He ane is ^vre en f Iche stede, wende pf r pu wende ; 

He is buven us and bineoSen, biforen and bihinde ; 
pe Se Godes wille deS, eiSer he mei him finde. 

Jlche rune he ihSrS and he wat ealle dfde ; 

^ his. ® as often. ® marke. * ove siliti. 



THE POEMA MORALE 


279 


He SurhsihtS falches mannes tJanc whet sceal us to rfde. 

We J^e breketS Codes hfse, and giiltet swa ilome, 

Hwet scule we seggen Q^er don set t 5 e miichele dome ? 
pa Sa luveden undht, and iivel lif ledde, 

Hwet scule hi segge gcSer don engles beot? ofdredde ? 5 

Hwet scule we beren biforen us ^ mid hwan scule we cwemeu 
We pe n^vre god ne diiden pe hevenliche demen ? 
p|r scule beon deofles swa vele wiille^ us forwre^en ; 

NabbetS hi naping for^yte of eal pat hi isf5en. 

Eal pet we misdiide her, hit wiilleS cuSe p^re, 10 

Buten we habbe hit ibet tSe hwile we her wfre. 

Eal hi habbet an heore iwrite pet we misdiide here ; 
p|h we hi niiste ne isfjen ® hi wfren ure ivere. 

Hwet sculen hdrlinges do, pe swikene, pe forsworene? 

Wi swa fele beocS icliiped, swa fewe beotS icorene ? 15 

Wi, hwi w|re hi bi5ite, to hwan wfre hi iborene, 
pe scule beon to diet5e idemd and fvre ma forlorene ? 

Jlch man sceal him t5fr bicliipien and f ch sceal him demen ; 

His a5e weorc and his itianc to witnesse he sceal temen ; 

Ne mei him na man eal swa wel demen ne swa rihte, 20 

For nan ni cnawa^ him swa wSl bute ane Drihte. 
flc man wat him siilf betst, his weorch and his-iwille; 

He If st wat he seitS ofte mf st, fSe hit wat eal is' stille. 

Nis nan witnesse eal sf miichel sf mannes a^e heorte ; 

Hwasf segge pet he beo hal, him self wat betst his smeorte, 25 
51c man sceal him siilf demen to die^e fSer to live ; 
pe witnesse of his weorc to otSer, ®is him sceal drive. 

Eal ^et fvre flc man hafS ido siitSSe he com to manne, ^ 

Swilc hit si a boc iwriten he seal iSenche ^enne ; 

Ac Drihte ne demtS nanne man sefter his biginninge, 30 

Ac al his lif sceal beo swich sf bii'S his enefinge ; 

Ac ^if pe ende is iivel eal hit is live], and .god -^if god is penne. 

God 5yve pet ure ende beo god and wit pet he us lenne. 

1 us, not in MS. ^ eweman. * ni aejen. 

N 2 



l8o n. THE SOUTHERN DIALECT 

pe man pe nele do na god, ne nfvre god Hf l^den, 
jGr diets and dom cume his dure he mei sare adrfden 
pet he ne mu^e tSenne bidde are, for hit itit ilome ; 

Forpi ^ he is ms tSe beot and b|at, and bit beforen dome, 
penne dfatS is set his dure, wel late he biddeS are ; 5 

Wei late he Ifte'S livel weorc pe hit ne mei don na mare. 

Siinne ift pe and pu naht hire, panne pu is ^ ne miht don na mare ® ; 
Forpi, he is sot pe swa abit to habbe Godes are^, 
pfhwhetSer we hit ilevetS wel, for Drihte siilf hit sfde, 

A whilche time s| f vre 6e man ofSinchet his misdf de, i o 

QSer later gSer ra^e, milce he sceal imeten ; 

Ac Se'pe nafS naht ibet, wel miichel he sceal beten. 

ManI man seit 5 , ‘ Hwa recp of pine tSe sceal habbe ende ? 

Ne bidde ich na bet beo ilSsd a domesdei of bende?* 

LBtel wat he hwet is pine, and litel he icnawetS, 15 

Hwilc hf te is t 5 fr sank wunetJ, hu biter winde pfr blaweS ; 

Hedde he ibeon ®fr anne dei, pSer twa bare tide, 

Nolde he for ael middenfard " 5 e Sridde pfre abide. 

pet habbet isf d pe come ^anne, pe it ® wiste mid iwisse, 

tlvel is pinie seove 5|r for seove nihtes blisse, 20 

End ure blisse pe ende hafS for endeliese pine. 

Betere is wpri weter idrunke pene atter imeng mid wine ; 

SwSnes brfde is swStJe swete, swa is of wilde deore, 

Ac al to dtire he hi bijS Se ^ifS pfrfore his sweore. 

Ful wSmbe mei lihtliche speken of hunger and of festen® ; 35 

Swa mei of pine pe naht nat hu pine sceal alfslen. 

Hedde he is’ afanded sume stunde, he wolde eal segge otSer; 
5^1§te him wfre wTf and child, suster, and feder and brother ; 

5vre he wolde inne wa her and inne wawe wunien 
WiS tSan pe mihte hellepjne bifleon and biscunien. 30 

te him wfre eal woruldvvele and eal eorSliche * blisse. 

For to Se miichele murcSe cume tSis mxirhSe mid iwisse. 

^ ; cf. 1. 8, * >iis. ^ uo more, ^ hore ; couplet from Egerton E. 

* l>. ** is. ® andfesteii, ^ his. ® eordliche. 



LAYAMON'S BRUT 


l8l 


II. ARTHUR'S LAST BATTLE--FROM LAYAMON'S 
BRUT 

pA com pf r in are tiden an oht mon riden, 

And brohte tidinge Arthure pan kinge 

From Modrfde^ his suster sune ; ArSure he wes wilcume 

For he wende pat he brohte boden swiSe g5de, 

Ar'SCir lai alle iQnge niht and spac wi’S pene ^eonge cniht; 5 
Swa naver nulde he him siigge soS hu hit ferde. 
pa hit wes dsei a niar5en and du3e'Se gon stMen, 

ArtSur pa up aras and sirehte his aermes ; 

He aras up and adun sat swtilc he wfore swiSe seoc. 
pa axede hine an vaeir cniht, ^Laverd, hu havest pu ivaren 
toniht V 10 

ArtSur pa andswarede — a mode him wes unf^e — 

' Toniht a mine sl|pe, pfr ich laei on bure, 

Me im^tte a sweven ; pf rvore ich ful sari aem. 

Me imf tte pat mon me hof uppen are halle ; 

pa halle ich gon bistriden swiilc'ich wolde riden; 15 

Alle pa Ipnd pa ich ah, alle ich pfr oversah, 

And Walwain sat bivoren me, mi sweord he bar an hpnde. 
pa com Modrf d ^ faren pfre mid unimfte volke ; 

He bar an his hgnde ane wlax strpnge ; 

He bigon to hewene hardliche swiSe ; 20 

And pa postes forheou alle pa heolden up pa halle. 
pfr ich iseh Wenhever |ke, wimmonen leofvest me ; 

A 1 pf re miiche hallerof mid hire hpnden ® heo todroh. 
pa halle gon t 5 h^lden, and ich h»ld to gr unden, 

^ Moddredci as often, but less commonly than the form with one d, 

2 Moddred, P hondeden. 



182 


II THE SOUTHERN DIALECT 


pat ml riht germ tobrac ; seide Modrfd " Have pat.’ 

AdGn veol pa halle and ^ Walwain gon to valle, 

And feol a pf re eortSe ; his ^rmes brfken ^ beine. 

And ich igrap ml sweord leofe mid mire leoft hgnde. 

And sm^t of Modrf dis bafd pat hit wgnd a pene veld ; 5 

And pa quene ich al tosnaSde mid deore mine sweorde ^ 

And seoSSen ^ ich heo adun ® sette in ane swarte piitte ; 

And al ml vole riche sette t 5 flfme, 

pat nuste ich under Crlste whar heo bicumen wforen. 

Buten ml seolf ich gon ® atstgnden uppen ane wplden, to 

And ich p|r 'wpndrien agon wide ^eond pan moren, 
pgr ich isah gripes and grisliche fu3eles. 
pa com an giildene leo ll^en over dune, 

Deoren swi^e hende pa ure Drihten makede 

pa leo me orn foren to and iveng me bl pan midle, 15 

And forS hire gun jeongen and to p§re wende ; 

And ich isaeh pa ® titSen I pfre driven, 

And ]5e leo I j^an vlode iwende wide mid me ® seolve^ 
pa wit I comen, pa StSen me hire binomen ; 

Com pfr an fisc lit 5 e and fereden me to Ipnde ; 20 

pa wes al ich wft and werl of sor^en and seoc. 
pa gon ich iwakien, swiSe ich gon to quakien ; 
pa gon ich to bivlen swiilc ich al ffir burne. 

And swa ich habbe al niht of mine swevene swiSe ipoht, 

For ich wat to iwisse agan is al ml blisse ; 25 

For a to mine live screen ich mot drije. 

Wale, pat ich nabbe here Wenhaver mine quene ! ' 

pa andswarede pe cniht, ‘ Laverd pu havest unriht ; 

Ne sculde me navere sweven mid screen arecchen, 

pu sert pe riccheste men pa rixleo^ on Ipnden, so 

And pe alre wiseste pe wunetS under weolcne. 

1 &, as occasionally. * brekeen. * sweorede. ■* seodtJen. 

« adum. ■ ® gond. ‘ make. ® J)ae. ® me, not in MS. 

swenenene. what. 



LAYAMON’S BRUT 


183 


gif hit wf ore ilimpe, swa niille hit Ore Drihte, 

pat Modrfd pire suster sune hafde pine quene inume, 

And al pi kineliche Iqnd isset an his ajere hgnd 
pe pu him bitahtest pa pu to Rome pohtest, 

And he hafde al pus ido mid his swikedome, 5 

pen ^ 3et J?u mihtest pe awreken wur’SlIche mid wf pnen. 

And 9eft pi Ifnd halden and walden pine leoden, 

And pine feond fallen pe pe ufel unnen, 

And sl^n heom alle clane pet pfr no bilaven nane/ 

Ar'SOr pa andswarede, aSelest alre kinge, 10 

‘ Lgnge biS ^vere pat no wene ich n^vere, 
pat ffivere Modrf d mi msei, pat mon is me leofvest 

Wolde me biswiken for alle mine richen, 

No Wenhaver mi quene wakien on ponke ; 

NiilleS hit biginne '- for nane weorldmonne.’ 15 

^fne pan worde fortSriht pa andswarede pe cniht : 

‘ I sugge pe soS, leofe king, for ich sem pin underling, 
pus hafeS Modi f d idon ; pine quene ^he hafeS ifon, 

And pi wiinliche Ignd isaet an his a^ere hgnd. ^ 

He is king and heo is quen®; of pine kiime nis na wehe, 20 
For no wene?S heo navere to so^^.^,.pat pu cumen a^ain from Rome. 
Ich asm pin a^en mon, and iseh pisne swikedom ; 

And ich asm icumen t 5 pe seolven SC'S pe t 5 siiggen. 

Min hafved beo to wedde pat isasid ich pe habbe 
Sot 5 buten Ifse of leofen pire quene, 25 

Ajid of Modrfde pire suster sune, hu he hafvetS Briitlgnd pe 
binume.' 

pa saet hit al stille in ArtSures halle ; 
pa wes pfr s^rinesse ^ mid sele pan kinge ; 
pa wforen Bruttisce men swi^e unbalde vor p»n. 
pa umbe stunde stefne pfr stiirede ; 30 

Wide me mihte iheren Brtitten ibfren, 

^ ]>e. 2 half line supplied from text B, but with the forms of A. 

® quej probably intended for qne«quen, saerin^esse. 



IL THE SOUTHERN DIALECT 


184 

And gunne to tellen a feole ciinne spellen 
Hu heo wolden fordeme Modrf d and J?a quene, 

And al J>at monciin fordon pe mid Modrf d heolden. 

Ar^ur J)a cleopede, hendest alre Briitte, 

‘ Sitte^ adun stille, cnihtes inne halle, 5 

And ich eou telle wiille spelles uncu^e. 

Nu t6mser5e j^enne hit dsei bitS, and Hrihten hine sende, 

Forts ich wile bu^e in toward Briittaine ; 

And Modrf d 2 ich wulle slan® and }3a quen forbeme, 

And alle ich wiille fordon pa biluveden pen swikedom. 10 

And her ich bilfofVen wtille me leofvest monne, 

Howel minne leofve msei hexst of mine •ciinne, 

And half mine verde ich bil^fven a pissen ^rde 
To halden al pis kinelpnd pa ich habbe a mire hfnd. 

And penne pas ping beotS alle idone, a3an ich wiille to Rome, 15 
And mi wiinliche I§nd bit^che * Walwaine mine mseie, 

And ivorpe ml beot seotStSe ® bl mine bare life ; 

Scullen alle mine feond vseisiS ® make^e/ 

pa stod him up Wahvain pat wes Ar'Sures mmi, 

And pas word saide ; pe eorl wes abol5e : 30 

‘ iEldrihten Godd, domes waldend, 

Al middel^rdes mund, whi is hit iwurSen 

pat ml brotSer Modrfd pis mortS hafve^ itimbbred ? 

Ah todsel ich atsake hine here bivoren pissere du^e^e, 

And ich hine fordemen wiille mid Drihtenes wille ; 25 

Ml seolf ich wiille hine anhon haxte alre warlen ; 
pa quene ich wiille mid Goddes laje al mid horsen todra$e. 

For ne beo ich navere blTSe pa wile ha beoS alive, 

And pat ich habbe mine ^m awr^ke mid pan beste */ 

Briittes pa answarede mid baldere stefne, 30 

' Al ure wf pnen sHnden 5arewe ; nu tomai^en we scullen varen/ 
A mar3en pat hit dsei wes, and Drihten hine senden, 

^ “jpi, as occasionally. ® moddred. ® scaln. ^ bitatseche, 

® seodiSe. ® wasisiS. a. ® berste. 



LAYAMOWS BRUT 


1S5 


Ar'Sur ^ vor^ him wende mid a^elen his folke ; 

Half he hit bil^fde, and half hit for^ ladde. 

For^ he wende f urh fat l^nd fat he com to Whitsgnd ; 

Scipen he hsefde sone, monie and wel idone ; 

Ah feowertene niht fulle f fre Isei fa verde . 5 

peos wederes ablden, windes bidflde, 

Nu was sum forcuS kempe in ArSures ferde ; 

An^n swa he demen iherde of Modrfdes d|' 5 e 
He nom his swein aneoste and sende to fissen londe. 

And sende word Wenhaveren heou hit was iwur'^en, 10 

And hu Ar'Sur wes on vore mid miiclere ferde, ^ 

And hii he wolde taken on, and al hu he wolde don. 
pa quene com to Modrfd fat was hire leofvest monnes 
And talde him tidende of ArtSure fan kinge, 

Hu he wolde taken an, and al hu he w^olde don, 15 

Modrfd^ nom his SQnde and sende to SexlQnd 
After Childriche — f e king wes swTSe riche — 

And b^d hine cume to Briitaine; ffrof he bruke sculde. 

Modrf d ^ bad Childriche, f ene strange and f ene riche, 

Wide ^ senden spnde a feouwer half Sexlgnde, 20 

And beoden fa cnihtes alle fat heo bijeten mihte, 
pat heo comen sone to fissen kineddme 
And he wolde Childriche ^eoven of his riche 
Al bi^eonde f f re ® Humbre, for he him scolde helpe 
To fihten witS his ^me, Ar^ure fan® kinge. 25 

Childrich bgh sone into BriitlQnde, 
pa Modrfd hafde his ferde isomned of monnen, 
pa wforen f f re italde sixtl f usende 

Herekempen harde of hftSene volke, 

pa heo wf oren icumen hidere for ArSures heerme, ' 30 

Modrfd to helpen, forcutSest monnen. 
pa f e yerde wes isome of ^che monciinne 

1 ar?Su. ^ modrsed, ® weide. kinedone. * perere, 

® artSurcn, hut cf. 1 , 14 and often. ^ ardures. 



i86 


II, THE SOUTHERN DIALECT 


pa heo wforen ]3|r on hfpe an hundred ^ pusende, 

Hf^ene and Cristencj mid Modrfde kinge. 

ArtSur lai at Whitsgnd ; ieouwertene niht him puhte to Igng. 
And al Modrfd wiiste wat ArtSur p^r wolde ; 

^Iche dai him comen spnde from pas kinges hirede. 5 

Pa ilomp hit an pne time miichel rein him gon rine, 

And pe ® wind him gon wende and stod of pan Ostende ; 

And ArtSur to scipe fflsde mid alle his verde, 

And hehte pat his scipmen brohten hine to Romenel 

pfr he pohte up wende into pissen Ignde. lo 

pa ® he to pfre havene com, Modrfd him wes avorn on 

Ase pe dsei gon lihten ^ heo bigunnen to fihten 

Alle pene Ignge dsei ; mom mon pf r df d laei. 

Summe hi fuhten I'lgnde, summe bi pan strgnde ; 

Summe heo letten ut of scipen scerpe g^ren scripen. 15 

Walwain biforen wende and pene wsei rumde, 

And sloh pf r aneuste peines elleovene ; 

He sloh Childriches sune, he was pfr mid his fader icume. 

To rest code pa sunne ; w® wes pa monnen, 

pfr wes Walwain afslae^e, and idon of lifeda^e, 20 

purh an eorle Sexisne — s^rl wurSe his saule. 
pa wes ArSur s®n and sorhful an heorte forpi ; 

And pas word bodede, ricchest alre Briitte : 

‘ Nu ich ileosed habbe mine sweines leofe. 

Ich w&sle bi mine swevene whaet sor3en me wforen jevetSe. 25 
Isla5en is Angel pe king pe wes min a^en deorling, 

And Walwaine mi suster sune — wa is me pat ich was mon 

iboren. > _ v , ! . ‘h. - 

Up nu of sdipen biftve, mine beomes ohte. 

iElfne pan worde wenden to fihte 
Sixti pusend angn selere kempen, • 30 

And brfken Modrfdes trume, and wel nfh him seolve wes inome- 
Modrfd bigon to fleon and his folc after teon; 

^ hunddred, ® fae. ^ romerel. ^ auom on. ® lihte. 



LAYAMON'S BRUT 


187 


Fltijen veondllche, feldes beoveden §ke ; 
gurren stanes mid ]?an bl 5 dstr|mes. 
pf r wfore al pat iiht idon, ah pat niht to ratSe c6m 3 
5if pa niht nfore, isla^en hi wf oren alle. 

pe niht heom todf Ide ^eond slades and jeond ^ dunen ; 5 

And Modrfd swa vor^ com pat he ^ves at Lundene. 

Iherden pa burhweren hu hit was al ifaren, 

And warnden him in^eong and alle his folke. 

Modrfd peone wende toward Winchestre 

And heo hine undervengen mid alle his monnen. 10 

And Ar^ur after wende mid alle his mahte, 
pat he com to Winchestre mid miichelre verde. 

And pa burh al bir®d ; and Modrfd pf rinne abeod. 

pa Modrfd isseh pat ArtSur him wes swa nfh, 

Ofte he hine bipohte wset he don mahte. 15 

pa a pfre ilke niht he hehte his cnihtes alle, 

Mid alle heore iwf pnen ut of burh^e wenden, 

And sseide pat he weolde mid fihte pf r atstgnden. 

He bihehte pfre btir3ewere aver mEre freo la^e, 

Wit 5 pan pa heo him heolpen at hf3ere neoden. 20 

pa hit wes daeiliht ^aru pa wes heore fiht. 

ArSur pat bihedde, pe king wes abol3e ; 

He lette bemen blawen and beonnen men to fihten ; 

He hehte alle his peines, and aSele his cnihte 

Son somed to fihten, and his veond ® avallen, 25 

And pe burh alle fordon, and pat burhfolc ahon. 

Heo togadere stopen and stiirnliche fuhten. 

Modrfd pa pohte what he don mihte ; 

And he diide pfre, alse he diide elleswhare, 

Swikedom mid pan m^ste ; tor avere he dude unwraste; 30 
He biswac his iveren bivoren Winchestren, 

And lette him to cleoplen his leofeste anan cnihtes, 

And his leoveste freond alle of alien his folke, 

^ jeon, ® winchastre. ® veod. 



i88 


IL THE SOUTHERN DIALECT 


And bistal from )?an fihte— ]3e feond hine 3.36— 

And ]?at folc gode lette al f»fr forwurtJe. 

Fuhten alle dsei ; wenden fat heore laverd f gr l^i. 

And wgore heom aneoste at miichelere neode, 
pa heold he f ene wai fat touward Hamtone lai, 

And heolde touward havene, forcuSest hseleSe ; 

And nom alle fa scipen fa f f r oht weore, 

And fa steormen alle to fan scipen neode ^ 

And ferden iiitS Cornwalen, forcu^est kingen a fan dajen. 

And Ar’^Sur Winchestre, fa burh bilai wel faste ; ^ 

And al fat monciin ofsloh — ffr wes sor3en inoh— 

pa 3eonge and fa aide, alle he aqualde. 
pa fat folc wes al dgd, fa burh al forswelde, 
pa lette he mid alle tobreken fa walles alle. 
pa wes hit itimed f gre fat Merlin seide while : 

‘ iErm wurSest f u Winchsestre, f ^ eorSe f e seal forswal3e/ 

Swa Merlin s^ide, f e wite^e wes in»re. 

pa quen ^ Isei inne Eouwerwuc, nses heo n^vere swa sarlic ; 
pat wes Wenhaver fa quene, faei^est wimmonne. 

Heo iherde siiggen sot^ere ® wdrden, 

Hu ofte Modrgd flah, and hu Art 5 ur hine bibah ; 

Wa wes hire f gre while fat heo wes on life. 

Ut of Eouerwike bl nihte hgo iwende, 

And touward Karliun tiihte swa switSe swa heo mahte. 
pider heo brohten bl nihte of hire cnihten twei5e; 

And me hire hafd biwffde mid ane hall rifte, 

And heo wes f gr munechenej karefullest wife, 

pa niisten men of f gre quene war heo bicumen wgore, 

No feole 3gre seo^e ntiste hit mon to soSe, 

WhatSer heo wgore on dgtSe, and hu heo henne wende % 
pa heo hire seolf wgore dsunken in fe watere. 

Modrgd wes I Comwale and somnede cnihtes feole ; 

T 5 Irlgnde he sende aneoste his sgnde ; 

^ neodde. » qne. * sotJfee. ^ half line from B. 



LAYAMON^S BRUT 


189 


To Sexl9nde he sende aneouste his spnde ; 

To Scotl^nde he sende aneouste his s^nde; 

He hehten heom to cume alle anan ]:>at wolde Ignd habben, 

Q'Ser seolver 9tSer gold, gtSer ^ ahte ^tSer ^ Ignd ; 

On selchere wlsen he warnede hine seolven, 5 

Swa de?S ^Ic witer mon J)a neode cume^ uvenan 
ArSur f>at iherde, wraSest klnge, 
pat Modrfd wses 1 Cornwale mid miichele monweorede^ 

And fjfr wolde abiden pat Ar^ur come riden. 

ArtSur sende sgnde ^eond al his kinelgnde, ro 

And to cumen alle hehte pat quic wes on Iqnde, 
pa t 5 vihte oht wf oren, wf pnen t 5 beren ; 

And whaswa hit fors^te pat pe king hete, 
pe king hine wolde a folden quic ^ al forbernen. 

Hit l^c toward hirede folc unimfte, 15 

Ridinde and ganninde swa pe rein falleS ^ adune. 

ArSur for to Cornwale mid unimfte * ferde. 

Modrfd pat iherde, and him to^eines heolde 
Mid unimfte folke, — pfr wfore mqnie vseie. 

Uppen pfre Tambre® heo tuhten logadere ; 20 

pa stiide hatte Camelford, evermare ilast pat ilke weorde ; 

And at Camelforde wes isomned sixti pusend, 

And ma pusend pfrto ; Modrfd wes heore ^Ider. 

pa piderward gon ride Artlur pe riche, 

Mid unimfte folke, vasie pah hit wfore. 25 

Uppe pfre Tambre heo tiihte tosomne ; 

Heven heremarken, halden togadere; 

Luken sweord Ignge, leiden o pe helmen ; 

Ftir ut sprengen ; speren brastllen ; 

Sceldes gonnen scanen ; scaftes tobrfken ; 30 

pfr faht al tosomne folc unimfte. 

Tambre wes on flode mid unimfte blode ; 

Mon I pan fihte nfn pfr ne mihte ikennen nenne kempe, 

^ Oder. ^ wahswa. 2 q^id, s failed ; B. ren fallens. * unite. ® Tanbre* 



II, THE SOUTHERN DIALECT 


190 

Nq hwa diide wiirse ng hwa bet, swa ]?at wi^e wes imenged; 

For ®lc sloh adun riht, wfore he swein, wfore he cniht. 
p|r wes Modrf d ofsla5e and idon of lTfda5e, 

And alle his cnihtes isla^e ^ in j?an fihte. 

pfr weoren ofsla^e alle J?a snelle, 5 

Ar^ures hiredmen hf3e and lowe 
And pa Briittes alle of ArtSures horde, 

And alle his fosterlinges of feole kineriches, 

And Ar^ur forwunded mid walspfre brade ; 

Fiftene he hafde feondllche wunden ; 10 

Mon mihte 1 pare laste twa gloven ipraste. 
pa nas p^r na mare 1 pan fihte to lave, 

Of twa hundred pusend monnen pa pfr leien tohauwen, 

Buten Arthur pe king ane, and of his cnihtes tweien. 

Art 5 ur wes forwunded wunder ane switSe. 15 

pfr to him com a cnave pe wes of his ciinne ; 

He wes Caddres sune, pe eorles of Cornwaile ^ ; 

Constantin hehte pe cnave, he wes pan kinge deore. 

ArSur him lokede on pfr he lai on folden, 

And pas word seide mid sorhfulle heorte : 20 

‘ Constantin ® pu art wilcume, pu w§ore Cadores’ sone ; 

Ich pe bitache here mine kineriche, 

And wite mine Briittes a t 5 pines lifes ® ende. 

And hald heom alle pa la^en pa habbeotJ istgnden a mine da^en 
And alle pa la^en gode pa bi UtSeres da^en stode. 25 

And ich wtille varen to Avalun, to vairest alre maidene. 

To Argante pfre quene, alven swiSe sceone. 

And heo seal ^ mine wunden makien alle isunde, 

A 1 hal me makien mid halewei3e drenchen ; 

And sed^e ® ich cumen wiille to mine kineriche, 30 

And wunien mid Briitten mid miichelere wiinne/ 

1 Gap in text A; first part of line supplied from B. ^ Ardures heredmen. 
^ and lowe supplied from B. fehte. ^ Corwaile. ® Costsetin. 

® ])ines lifes. ^ slab * seotie. 



THE LIFE OF SMNT JULIANA 


19I 


^Efne J?an worden com of sg wenden 
pat wes an sceort bat ll^en, sceoven mid li'Sen, 

And twa wimmen pf rinne -wunderlTche idihte ; 

And heo n5men Arthur anan, and aneouste bine vereden, 

And softe bine adun leiden, and for^ gunnen llSen . 5 

pa wes hit iwurSen pat Merlin seide wbilen, 
pat wgore nnimgte care of Ar^ures for^fare ; 

Bruttes ileve'S jete pat he beo ^ on live, 

And wunnTe ^ in Avalun mid fairest alre alven j 

And lokie^ evere Briittes jete whan Ar^ur cume^^ liSen. 10 

Kis naver pe mon iboren, of naver nane biirde icoren, 

pe cunne of pan sd^e of ArSure siiggen ® mare ; 

Bute whale wes an wite5e, Merlin ® ihate ; 

He bodede worde — his quides wgoren so^e— 

pat an ArSur sculde ^ete cum Anglen to ftilste. ^5 


in. THE LIFE OF SAINT JULIANA 

In ure Laverdes luve pe is Feader of frumschaft, ant on his 
deorewurtSe sunes nome, ant 6 pes hall gastes pet ® glide's of ham 
baSen, alle lewede men pet understgnden ne mahen Latines Igdene 
llSin and liistnin ane meidenes liflMe, pet is of Latin iturnd int 5 
Englisch pet te lifhall Lgfdl in heovene luvie us pe mare, ant of pis 20 
lihinde iTf Igade us, wiS hire erndunge pe is icoren of Crist, into pe 
eche of heovene. 

peos meiden ant tis martir wes Juliane inempnet in Nichomedes 
burh, ant ® of hgcSene ciin icumen, ant hire fleschliche feder wes 
Affrican ihaten, of pe hf^ene mgst. peo pet Cristene weren 25 
derfliche h^ droh ham to dga^e ; ah heo, as peo pet te heovenlich 
feder luvede, Igafde al hire aldrene lahen ant bigon to luvien pene 

1 MnelitJen. ® bon. * wunnien. * cume^cnmen. . ® sngen. 

^ Mserlin. qiii( 5 es. ^ >, as tisnal ; expanded ]?et in accordance witb 

forms in texti ® "1, as often ; ant only form in the piece. he not in MS. 



192 


//. THE SOUTHERN DIALECT 


liviende Laverd, J>e lufsum Godd ]?at wisse^ ant welde'S al J>et is on 
worlde ant al J?et iwraht is. 

pa wes bi pon time, as redunge^ tone's, Maximian, >e modi 
keiser ine Rome, heinde ant herlende hfSene mawmets unmeS 
rniicliel bird and undtihti duheSe, ant fordemde alle peo pe on 5 
Drihtin bilefden. pes Maximian luvede an heh mon of ciinne ant 
eke riche of rente, Elewsius wes ihaten, ant weren as feolahes purh 
miiche freontschipe. pis meidenes feder ant he weren swiSe wel 
togederes. As he sum chere iseh hire utnume feir ant freoliche 
5uheSeS he felde him iwundet pet, wiSuten lechnunge of hire, 10 
libben he ne mahte. Affrican wiste wel pet he wes freoboren, ant 
pet him walde bicumen a freoboren btirde, ant ^ettede him his 
dohter; and heo** wes sone ihpndsald al hire unwilles. Ah heo 
triiste on him pat ne trukeneS na mon pet triisteS treowliche on 
him, ant euch deis dei eode to chirche to leornen Codes lare, 15 
^eomllche to witen hu ha mahte best witen hire unweommet and 
hire meiShad wiSiiten man of monne. Elewsius, pe luvede hire, 
Ipnge hit him puhte pet tis dede nere idon pet heo ibroht were 
purh wedlac to bedde. Ah, as ha wende hire summes weis to 
witene, sende him to seggen pet nalde ha lihten swa lahe, ne 20 
nehlechen him for nan liviende mon, .fr pen he were under 
Maximian hehest in Rome, pet is hehreve, Sone sg he iherde pis, 
he bi^et et te keiser pet he ^ettede him reve t 5 beonne as pet he 
i3lrnd hefde ; and he, as me pa luvede, lette Ifaden him into cure 
pet ® te riche riden in, ant tuhen him ^ont te tun from strete to 25 
strete. And al pe cur wes bitild pet he wes in wi^ purpre, wi'S pal, 
and wit? ciclatun ant deorewurSe cla%s, as pe pet heh ping hefde 
to heden. And pa he hefde pis idon, he sende hire to seggen pet 
he hefde hire wil iwraht, ant heo schulde his wiirchen. 

Juliane pe f die, Jesu* Cristes leovemon, of his blisfule luve balde 30 
hire seolven, sende him to onswere bl an of hire sonden : ‘ Elewsius, 
wite pu hit wel irfadi, wraStSi sg pu -Wrap'S!, ng lengre ntil ich hit 
heolen pe j ^ef pU wiilt Ifaven pe lahen pet tu list in, ant leven in 

^ redegunge. ^*p,asTSSu>ak 2 ^ Ihu, as usual. 



THE LIFE OF SAINT JULIANA 


193 


Godd Feder ant in his deorewur? 5 e Sune ant I Ipe Hall Cast, ich 
ulle wel neomen ]?e ; ^ef ]3u niilt ng, J^u art wtindl of me, ant o^er 
luve sech ]>e/ pa pe reve iherde pis he wreScSede him switSe, ant 
hire feder cleopede ant feng on to tellen him hu his dohter droh 
him from deie to deie, ant efter pet he wende to habben his iwil sg 5 
ha him pis word sulliche sende. pet ilke Godd,' quotS hire 
feder, ' pet me is latS to gremlen, beo hit soS pat tu seist, to wratJer 
hfale seide ha hit, ant nu ich iille 6 grfat grome al bitfachen hire 
pe to wiirchen pi wil ant al pet te wel llkeS as mit tin ahne.' Ant 
me cleopede hire for^ bivoren hire feder, ant he feng feire to fpndin 10 
his dohter : ‘ Ml deorewurtSe dohter, hwerfore vorsakest u pi sy ant 
tl selh'Se, pe weolen ant te wiinnen pet walden awakenin ant waxen 
of pi wedlac pet ich pe to reade ? For he is inch laverd, Elewsius, 
ine Rome, ant tu maht beon Ifafdl, dohter, ^ef pu wel wiilt.' 
Juliane pe ?adle onswerede him ant seide as peo pet ine Godd hire 15 
hope hefde, ‘ gef he wiile leven an God Almihti, penne mei he 
speoken perof ant inoh raSe speden; ant ^ef he nlile nawt,ne schal 
wTven on me, wive per his wil is.' pa hire feder iherde pis, pa feng 
he to swerien : ‘ Bl m! kinewmtSe laverd Apollo, ant bi ml deore 
]§afdi Diane, pet ich miiche luvie, ^ef pU baldest heron ich iille 20 
leoten deor toteoren ant toluken pe, ant ^eoven pi fifsch to^ 
fuheles of pe liifte.' Juliane him onswerede ant softellche seide, 

‘ Ne wen pu nawiht, leove feder, pet tu affeare me swa, for Jesu 
Crist Codes sune, pet ich on leve ant luvie as Laverd lufsumest on 
live, pah ich beo forbernd ant toloken limel, niil ich her onont 35 
buhen pe nawiht,' pa feng eft hire feder on wi ’5 olhnunge to 
fgndin 5ef he mahte eis weis wenden hire heorte, ant seide hire 
lufsumllche pet ne schulde ha nane wiinne lihtllche wilnin pet he 
ne schulde welden, wit 5 pet ha walde hire pone wenden, ‘ Nai/ 
quo?? pet meiden, ^ schuld ich don me to him pat is alle deovlen 30 
bitaht ant to eche d§S idemet, to furwur^en wi'S him world abuten 
ende, for his wedlakes weole g^er for enl wiinne ? ' Forso??, ich hit 
segge, unwurS is hit me. Ich iille pet he hit wite wel, ant tu' eke 

])rof. ^ to supplied from Bodl. MS. ® feder not’in MS. 


0 



194 


11. THE SOUTHERN DIALECT 


mid him, ]?et ich am iweddet to an pet icli iille treowliche to halden, 
ant wiSuten Ifs lu\Ien, pe is unllch liim ant alle worldlTch men; ne 
null ich him nowtier If aven ne lihen for weole ne for wiinne, for wa 
ne for wiinne pet 30 mahen don me,' 

pa feng hire feder to ^ wretSSen svvi^e ferllch, and swiSe hoker- 5 
liche freinede, ' Me hwet is he, pes were pet tu art lo iweddet, pet 
tu havest wi'buten me pine luve ilenet, for hwam pu letest lUtel of 
pet tu schuldest luvTen ? Ne ich never pet ich wite nes wiS him 
icnawen/ 'For Gode,' qno^ pet nieiden, 'pin harm is pe mare; 
nawt forpl pet tu navest ofte iherd of him ^are, pet is Jesu, Codes 10 
sune pe, for to lesen moncun pet forloren schulden beon, lette his 
deorwurSe llf on rode. Ne ich ne seh him never, pet me sare for- 
punchecS; ah ich him^ luvie ant leve as on laverde, ne schal me 
hrsin him from nowSer deovel ne mon/ ' For mi Hf/ qno^ hire 
feder, 'pe schal la‘Sin his luve. for pu schalt beon ibfaten mid 15 
besmes swi bittre pet ta wummon were schal to wraSer hfale 
iwurtien.' ‘ Swa miiche,' qvocJ ha, ' ich iwurt 5 e him pe leovere, sg 
ich dervre ping for his luve drehe, pet li wil is, wurch nu.' Ant 
he bet hatterllche striipen hire steortnaket, ant bften hire swa 
liiSere pet hire leofliche lich liSerl al o blode. Ant swa ha duden 20 
SQ liiSere pet te blod 5ft adun of pe 5f rden. Ant heo bigon to 
^eien, 'Bfaten sg bfaten, 3eBeliales biideles, ne mahe 50 nowtJer 
ml luve ne min bilfave Ifitlen toward him, ml lufsum leof, mi 
leovinde ^ Laverd ; ne niill ich leaven ower read pet forreadetJ ow 
seolven, ne ower mix mawmets^pet beo^ pes feondes fetles heien 25 
ne herlen, for teone ne for tintreow pet 38 mahen timbrin." * Na/ 
qnoS he, ' is it swa ? Hit schal sutelin sdne, for ich ulle bitfachen 
mislich pi bodT to Elewsium, pe riche reve 1 Rome, ant he schal 
forswelten ant forreden pe efler his ® wille, wiS alles ciinnes pinen/ 

' ge,' quotS pis meiden, 'pet mei Crist welden, for ne mahe 30 nawt 30 
don me bute hwet he wiile peavien ow, to miichelin mi mede ant 
te rniii^ie pet ll^ to meiShades menske ; for ever sg 3^ mare merriS 
me her, sg mi crune biS brihtre ant fehere. For ich iille bllSellche 

1 te. ® ichini. wratSel. * leowinde. * mawmex, ® es. 



IHE LIFE OF SAINT JULIANA 


195 

drehen evereuch derf for mT deore Laverdes luve, ant softe me 
bicS euch derf hwen ich him sem, )>ah Jju me to Elewsium willes 
bitfache. Ne 5eve ich for inc nowtJer, 'pet 50 me mahen harmen ; 
for SQ 5e mare me her harmef>, sg mare 50 me helped seovevald to 
heovene. Ant ^ef 50 me do^ to dfaSe, hit bitS me deorewurtSe, ant 5 
ich schal J^erJ^urh bli'Se bicumen into endelfse blissen, ant 50 schulen, 
wrecches, — a wei, ower wur'Ses pet ^e iboren weren — sinken to 
wra'^er hfale ow to pe bale bitter deope into helle/ 

Hire feder Affrican, fjurh j^is bittre teone bilahte hire 16 Elewsium, 
pe liitSere reve, ant he lette bringen hire bivoren him to his heh 10 
seotel as he set in dome as reve of pe burhe. . . . Ant set J?et bale- 
fule bfast as an burst bar pet grunde his tuskes, ant feng on to 
fgmin ant te grispatlen 6 f>is meoke meiden, ant ]5ohte on hwiicche 
wise he mahte hire awelden. Ant lette fecchen a feat and wi 5 pich 
hit fallen ant hfaten hit walm hat, ant het warpen hire ]?erin ^ hwen t 5 
hit wodelukest weolle. As me diide hire Jjerin^ ha cleopede to 
Drihtin ant hit colede anan, ant wartS hire as wiinsum as ever eni 
wlech weter pet were iwlaht te batSlen, ant leop wallinde hat up 
a^ein J^eo ilke pet hit hefden i^arket ant forscaldede of ham seolven 
fifti ant tene, ant fordude fifti al italde. pa pe reve iseh pis, he 20 
rende his clatSes ant toe him seolven bi pe top, ant feng to fiten his 
mawmets® ant lasten his laverd. ‘SwI^e,' quotS he, ‘ut of mm 
ehsih'Se, pet ich ne seo hire n 5 mare |r pe bodi wi'S pe buc beo 
isundret from hire hfavet/ 

Sone as ha pis iherde, ha herede Godd in heovene ant War'S 25 
swiSe gled, for pet heo iwilnet hefde. Me ledde hire ant ® leac * 
forS, ant heo wes |Sluke. As ha stutte 6 pe stiide per ha schulde 
d|S drehen, pa com pe ilke Belial of helle pet ha hefde ibfaten 
hire bihlnden, ant gon to 5eien, ‘ A, stalewurSe men, ne sparTe 50 
nawiht, ha haveS us alle scheome idon ; schendeS hire nuSen ant 30 
^eldeS hire ^arew borh, ne studgi 50 nfaver/ Juliane pe fdie 
openede hire ehnen ant lokede toward him, ant te bali blenchte ant 
braid him a^einward as an ischoten arewe. ^ Wumme pet ich libbe,^ 

^ ))ria. ^ mawmez. ® Supplied from Bodl. MS. * hleac. 



//. THE SOUTHERN DIALECT 


196 


quot 5 he, ‘ ]?a ich beo nu nan ilaht, ant 5ef ha kecche’S me nu ne find I 
n^aver leche ; igrlpe ha me fnes, ne ga I n§aver eft mare. Ant 
l|ac him ajeinward as a beore, >et unwiht, ne mahte him nawt letten. 

As ha schulde slupen ant strecchen Tor'S }?e swire, ha bed first ant 
feng on J^us to Ifaren J> 3 o J>et J>er weren, ant f>us seide : ‘ LiisteS 5 
me, leove men, ant lldeS ane hwlle, BhvepeS ant bireowseS ower 
siinnen, ant lasseS ^viS soS schrift ant wiS dedbote ; If aveS ower 
unlahen ant biildeS ower boldes uppon treowe staSele J?et ne dredeS 
na wind ne na weder nowSer. LokeS l?et te heovenlTch Laverd beo 
grundwal of al ])et 30 wtircheS, for Jjet stfnt studelfast, falle J^et lo 
falle \ CleopeS jeorne to Godd in hail chirche pet he ^eove ow 
wit wel for le donne, ant strenge ow wiS his strencSe a5ein }>en 
strpnge unwiht pet sekeS ^ ever ant aa ow for te swolhen. LiisteS 
writen lare ant luvIeS fierefter®*; wel is him J>et wakeS wel in J>is 
IQtle hwlle, ant witeS wel him seolven ant heorteliche sikeS ofte 15 
for his siinnen. pis w'orld weint awei as weter pet eorneS, ant as 
imet sweven aswindeS hire miirhSen ; ant al nis buten a Ifs wand 
pet we livieS. Lf aveS pe Ifase ant luvIeS pe soSe, for we schulen 
leten pis lif ntite we nfaver hwenne, ant reope we of pet ripe sed 
pet we seowen. SwiSe ich biseche ow pet ^e bidden for me, 20 
breSren ant sustren/ Ant ciiste ham a cos of pfs, alle as ha stoden, 
ant biheold uppard ant hehede hire stefne : ^Laverd Godd Almihti, 
pu luvest treowe biieave j ne Iff pu to pin ifan pin ilicnesse, ah 
underfeng me to pe, ant do me in pin englene bird wiS meidenes 
imfane. Ich ajeove to pe mi gast, Drihtin." Ant wiS pet ilke, 25 
beide ant df f dOvelunge dun to per eorSe, sone bihf fdet ; ant pe 
fdle angles, wiS hire sawle, singinde sihen toward heovene, 

SoSSea sone perefter com a sell wummon, Sophie inempnet, bi 
Nicomedes burh o rade toward Rome, of heh con akennet, ant 
nom pis meidenes bodi ant ber hit in a bat, biwunden deoiiiche 30 
in deorewurSe claSes. Xs ha weren in wettre, com a steorm ant 
draf ham to Ignde into Campaine ; ant per letta Sophie, from pe 
'sfa a mile, setten a chirche ant don hire bodi perin ® in stanene 


' ])et falle, from Bodi, MS, 


frefter. ® pria. 


* selelS, 



THE ANCHEN RIWLE 


197 


f>ruh hehliche as hit deh halhen ’ to donne. pe rove, pa he herde 
pis, bigon te rowen efter for te rfaven hit ham, ant I pe sfa^'^ 
senchte; for per arisen stormes starcke ant strgnge, ant breken 
pe schipes bord, adrenchten on hare prittu^e sum ant perto eke 
fowre, ant ^varp ham adriven to pe Ipnde, peras ^v^lde deor limel 5 
toluken ham, ant te unseli sawlen suncken into helle, 

pus pet f die meiden wende purh pmen t 5 heovenliche wiinnen, 
in pe nomecutJe burh Nicomede hatte, 6 pe sixtentSe del of 
Feovereles monet 5 , pe fortende kalende of Mearch pet cumetS efter. 
Heo us erndi to Godd pe grace of him seolven, pet rixleS in 10 
preohad, ant pah is an untwfamet. Iheret ant iheiet wuiSe he 
him ane as he is •svurSe, ant ever ah te beonne, world abuten ende. 
Amen. 


IV. THE ANCREN RIWLE, OR RULE OF NUNS 


Of Speech 

^^PELLUNGE alid ^ sm^^Gchuifge beoS ine mu^e b|ge, ase siht^e is 1 
pen eien ; auh we schullen l|ten smecchunge vort tet we, spfken of 15 
dwegm|te^ and sp^^ spellunge and tf refter of herrun^, of 

Oil alre! f rest n won ' ’-.--‘i -- * 


fresthwon scnulen to oure parlures p^’le, iwite^^^ ' 
ower meiden hwg hit bep pet® is icumen,j|'or s'^uch hit m«|be"“ 


5e schulen asunlen ou ; and hwon 50 alles molen vor^, cif&oiseS ful 20 
^eorne our muS, faren, and eien, and te breoste fke, and gpti fortS 
mid Codes drfde t 5 preoste. On frest siggeS ^ conjUeoTy and 


^ deh alhen. 


sea from Bodh MS. ® *3, as usual. ^ f, as often. 



ig8 II- the southern dialect 

Jjfrefter ‘henedinie', )>eX he ouh to siggen^^iercneS^his \v6rdes^nd 
sitteS al stille Jiet, h^yon he parteS jfrom ^-ou, Jiet he ne cunne ower 
god ne wer jivel noutSer, ne he he cunne ou nou'Ser blamen ne 
preisen. Sum is sp wel ilpred gSer sf wis iworded ]?et heo wolde 
bet he wUste hit fe sit and spfkeS touward him and jelt him word 5 
aaein word, and bicumetS meister jse schulde beon ancre, and 
IfaretS him Jjet is icunien to Ifren hire; wolde bi hire tale sone 
beon mit te wise icfid and icnowen. Icnowen heo is wel, vor ]3urln“ 
jjet flie i^et iieo weneS to beon wis ihplden he understont Jjet heo 
is sot, vor heo hunteS efter pris and kecchetS lastunge. |or eWf 10 
laste hwon he is iwend awei, ‘ peos ancre,’ he wttle siggen, ‘ is of 
muchele spfche.’, Eve heold ine Parais Ipnge tale midte neddre 
pet tplde hire al pet lescun pet God hire hefde ilfred andj^da^^^_^ 
pen epple; and sp pe veond purh hire word understod' anpii riht f 
hire wpcnesse and ivpnd wei touward hire of hire vorlprenesse. 15 
Ure Lffdl, Seinte Marie, dQde al andtJer wise, ne tplde heo pen 
engle npne tale, auh askede him ping scheortliche pet heo ne kutSe. 

35, mine leove silstren, voleweS Ore Lffd! and nout pe kakele Eve. 
Vorpi ancre, hwatsf heo beo, alsf muchel ase heo ever con and 
mei, hplde hire stille. Nabbe heo nout henne kiinde. pe hen 20 
hwon heo haveS ileid ne con buten kakelen. And hwat byit heo 
pfrof P KumeS pe cpve anpn riht and rfvetS hire hire eiren, and 
frft al pet of hwat heo schulde vorty bringen hire cwike briddes. 
And riht alsp pe latSere cpve deovel bertS awei vrom pe kakelinde 
ancren and vorswoluwetj al pe god pet heo istreoned habbetS, and 25 
schulden ase briddes bfren ham up touward heovene jif hit nfre 
icakeled. pe wreche peoddare mpre noise he makeS to jeien 
his* sppe, pen a riche mercer al his deorewurSe ware. To sume 
gpstliche monne pet jS beoS trtisti * uppen, ase je muwen beon of 
Ifit, god is pet 56 asken rfd, and salve pet he tfche ou t65^es 30 
fpndunges, and ine schrifte schfaweS him gif he wiile iheren ower 
grgste and ower Ipdlukeste silnnen, vorpi pet him areowe ou and 
purh pe bireounesse crie Crist inwardliche merci vor ou, and habbe 

^ \rornj. as often. ^ is, ® strusti. 



THE ANCREN RIV/LE 


199 


ou ine miinde and in his b 5 nen. ‘ Sed mtiUi venitmt ad ms in 
vesiimeniis ovium, inirinsecus aiitem suni lupi rapaces^ \ *Auh witeS 
ou and beotS iwarre/ he seitS, ure L^verd, ‘ vor monie cume'S to dii 
ischriid mid Igmbes fleose and beoS wode wulves/ Worldllche 
men ileve^ Itit^ religiuse 5etlesse; ne wilnie 50 nout to miichel 5 
hore kuSlfchunge. Eve wiSute drfde spec mit te neddre; ure 
Lffdl was ofdrfd of Gabrieles spfche. 

WiSute witnesse of wfopmdn pSer of wummon ]3et ou muwe 
iheren, ne sp§ke 50 mid ngne monne ofte ne Ignge ; and J^auh hit 
beo of schrifte 1 J^en ilke huse gSer ]yfr he muwe iseon touward ou, 10 
sitte fe ])ridde, bute ^if Ipe ilke J^ridde o^er stunde ® trukle. pis nis 
nout vor ou, leove sustren, iseid, ne vor oSer swiiche ; nowt, forpT 
pe treowe is misleved, and te sakelfase ofte bilpwe^^ vor wone 
of witnesse. Me ileve’S^|:jet 0vel sone, and te unwreste bllSellche 
lleS on pe gode. Sum unis|Iy hwon heo seide pet heo schrgf hire, 15 
hauetS iscKriven hire al to wundre. ^orprowen pe gode ever t 5 
habben' witnesse vor twp ancheisuns; nqmeli^e, pet gn is pet te 
Ontlule* ~ne muwen lien on heom s§ pet pe/ witnesse ne preove 
heom valse, pet dtSer is vor te ^iven pe dtire vorbisne, and binime 
pe tivele ancre pet il!^e unisf ll glle pet ich of seide. 20 

Ut of chirchejliirfe '^e hplde 50 ngne tale mid ngne monne, auh 
bfreS wurSschipe ^p^rto vor pet hgll sacrament pet je iseotj 
pfrpurh; and nilfe^oSerhwfiles ower wummen to pe buses purfe,‘ ‘ 
peo oSre men and wummen to pe parlurs piirle spfken buten vor 
neode, ne ouwe buten et peos twg piirles, ’ 25 

, Slle^e evex^ct te mf te, vor ^if oSre religiuse ddS hit ase 30 v’el 
wuteS' ae (men bivgreh alle: and aif eni have® d^rcL gist, do hire 
meiden ase in hire sttide te gledien hire vere,' and heo schal 
habben Ifave to gpenen hire piirl fnes gSer Iwles and maklen 
signes touward hire of gne glede chere. Summes kurteisle is 30 
ngtSclfas iturnd hire to uvele; under semblaunt of g 5 d is ofte 
ihfled stinne, Ancre and buses Iffdl ouh muche to been bi- 
tweonen. Everiche Vrideie of pe 3fr hgldetS silence, bute 3if hit beo^ 

^ hit. ® stude. 



IT, mw ^%mTHERN DIALECT 


^oo 

duble ffste, and teoume HisJ’iloife*# hit sum 6'Ser dai I 6e wike; i 'Sen 
Advent and i ( 5 e Utnbd'ifavifess, Wodnesdawes and Fridawes ; i Se 
Leinten J>reo dawes, [jfe swuvike ^ vort non of Jstre f ven. 

To owr meiden inu'^^^cjtn siggen 15 t wordes hwatsf 50 ® 
wiilleS; and 5if en! nirmooiii is of feorrene ikumen, hercneS his 5 
spfche and onsweri'e'S wordes 15 his askunge. 

Miiche fol he ■wf re ciflnuJtlte to his owene bihove, hweSersf he 

^Yolde grinden greot g^'CtfdWjte, ^if he grunde ]?et greot and lefde 
]:)ene hwfte. Hwgte iis Hiiyilili ssspfche, ase Seint Anselme seitS. Heo 
grint greot Jje chfofledl. fpiia tlwg chcoken beoS J>e twQ grinstgnes; 10 
pe tunge is J^e cleppe*, Ikite'S, leove siistren, pet ouwer cheoken 
ne grinden never btilee ssooM«ilQe»tf 6 de, ne our faren ne hercnen never 
bute soulehfale ; an«(ij ^ne our faren auh ower eie})urles 

tSneS a3ein idel sp^chft, ^ ne cume ng lale^ ne tiSinge of pe 

worlde. 15 

35 ne schulen vor nguu-e! ne warien, ne swfrien bute ^if 30 
siggen Svltteriiche gISeirsiifesASclie, gSer summe swiiche wise; ne ne 
prfche 36 to n§ne mom., nae:' Kjg mon ne aski ou rfad ne counsail, 
ne ne telle oil, Rgaode'S ’ffVQimmen gne. Seinte Powel vorbgad 
wummen to prfckeii-— non permitio docere! Nenne 20 
wfopmon ne chasti 30, rjae njinfjictwItetS him of his untSfau, bute 3if he 
beo pe gverkuSre, §flde ancren muwen don hit summes 

weis, auh hit nis noat ssiilkeesf jfing, ne ne limpetS nout tope 5unge. 

Hit is bore meistcj }«ei toQfciM gver 6 ? 5 re iset and habbe^ ham to 
witene; ancre naveS ^f’tene buten hire and hire meidenes. 25 
Hglde everlch his oivom tirt»i{Sstl,l 5 r and nout ne rgavie oSres. Mon! 
mon weneS to don v Si ^)?oe2ti lilie detS al to cwgade^^ vor, ase ich |r 
seide, under sembla-unt oo.if:|{g 5 de is ofte ill|TeA^siinne, and pmh 
swuch chastiement hSiregS rutm ancre arfred bitweonen hire and 
hire preost gSer a rdsindiedhvfe gSer a miiche weorre. 30 

Seneca seide, ^Ad ^olo vos esse rariloqtiosy iuncque pauci- 
loquos ’ ; pet is, ^ pe en & po8f|[|)'oe tale/ seitS Seneke the wise, ' ich iille 
pet 3e spfken seide, aiiil )s£sO()U):iiie bQten iStel/ Auh monl pSnt hire 

No 5e in MS. 


^ switywte. 


® ne ne. 



THE ANCREN RIWLE 


201 


word vor te Iften mg ut, as me deS water et tgr miilne cluse ; and 
zg diiden Jobes freond })et wgren icumen to vrovren him, sften 
stille alle seoveniht, auh J>eo heo hefden^ alles bigunne vor to 
spfkene J>eone ku^en heo nevere asliinten bore cleppe. Gregory": 

‘ Censura silencii nutritura est verhH Sg hit is ine ^ monie, ase 5 
Seint Gregoiie seitS, 'silence is wordes fostrild and bringe 5 for]? 
chfafle.’ An o&r half ase he sei^, ^ Juge silencium cogit celestia 
mediiari ^ — silence and wel iwiist nedeS ]>e ]?ouhtes up 
tduward ]?fr heovene/ A 1 sg ase muwen iseon J>et water hwon 
me pSnt hit, and stoppetS bivgren wel sg ]?et hit ne mu we adune- 10 
ward, ])eonne is hit inM vor to climben upward ; and je al 
]?isses weis punde^ ower wordes and forstoppe^ ouwer ]?ouhtes, 
ase 5e wiilleS })et heo climben and hlen touward heovene and nout 
ne vallen aduneward, and tovleoten ^eond te world ase deS 
miichel chgafle. Auh hwon 50 nede moten spfken, a Iflte wiht 15 
lesetS up ouwer mu^es flodjeten, ase me deS et tfr mulne, and 
Ifted adun sdne* 


Of Domestic Matters 

Hit ne limpeS nout to ancre of d^er monne elmesse vor to 
maklen hire large. Nolde me lauhwen ane beggare lude to bise- 
mare ]?et bede men to l|ste ? Marie and Marthe bgSe heo wfren 20 
sustren, auh bore llf sundrede. ge ancren habbetS inumen ou to 
Marie dgle, >et ure Lgverd sfllf herede. ^ Maria opiimam partem 
elegitl * Marthe, Marthe,' cweS he, ']?u ert ine mtichele baret; 
Marie have® ichgsen betere, and ne schal hire ngtSing binimen hire 
dgle.' Huswifschipe is Marthe dgle, and Marie dgle is stilnesse and 25 
reste of alle worldes noise, ]?et ngSing ne lette hire vor to iheren 
Codes stefne. And ldket 5 hwat God seit 5 , J>et ngSing ne schal 
binimen du ]?eos dgle. Marthe haveS hire mester ; IfteS hire 
iwurSen, and sitte ^e mid Marie stgnstille ef* Codes fet and 
hercnetS him gne. Marthe mester is vor to veden and schrSdcn 30 

^ ])eo hefden, heo above line. * Greg. ® ine. ^ ed. 



202 


//. THE SOUTHERN DIALECT 


povre inen, ase huselffd! : Marie ne ouh nout vor to entremften 
hire ]:frof, and ei blametS hire God siilf Qveral wfreS hire ]:frof, 
ase hgli writ witnetS. An o6er half, ngn ancre ne ouh for to nimen 
bute gnedeliche ]>et hire to needed. Hwarof peoauQ mei heo 
maklen hire large ? Heo schal libben bl elmesse ase neruhllche 5 
ase heo ever mei, and nout gederen vor to ^iven hit eft. Heo nis 
nout husewlf, auh is a chirche ancre. gif heo mei sparien enl 
povre schrfaden, sende ham al dernellche ut of hire woanes; under 
semblaunt of gode is ofte ihfled stinne. And hwu schulen ]?eos 
riche ancren fet heoZ eort5etilien, pSer habbeS rentes isette, don to 10 
povre neiheboures dernellche hore elmesse ? Ne wilnen nout for 
to habben word of pne large ancre, ne vor to ^iven miichel, ne beo 
npn fe grfdlure vor to habben mpre. Beo ^ grf dinesse rote of 
hire bitternesse ; alle beo^ bowes bittre j^et of hire springe®. 
Bidden hit vor to jiven hit nis nout ancre rihte. Of ancre 15 
kurteisTe, and of ancre largesse, is ikumen ofte siinne and schfome 
on ende. 

Wummen and children ]?et habbeS iswunken vor ou, hwatsp 50 
sparle® on ou makleS ham t 5 ftene; nenne mon bivpren ou bute 
5if he habbe neode, ne la®e ^e to drinken nout. Ne 3irne ich J^et 20 
me telle ou hendl ancren. Et gode vreond nime® al f>€t ^e habbe® 
neode hwon heo beode® hit ou ; auh for npn bpde ne nime ^e nout 
wi®uten neode, leste ^e kecchen J»ene npme of gederinde ® ancren. 

Of mon f>et 50 misleve® ne nime 50 nou®er lesse ne mpre, nout sp 
mtiche Jjet beo a rote gingivre. Miichel neode schal driven ou vor 25 
te bidden out; f>auh fdmodllche schfaweS to ower leoveste 
vreond ower miseise 

ge, mine leove sustren, ne schulen habben np bf st bute kat pne. 
Ancre J>et have® eihte J^iinche® bet husewlf, ase Marthe was, ]?en 
ancre ; ne npne weis ne mei heo beon Marie mid griSfulnesse of 30 
heorte. Yor ]?eonne mot heo J^enchen of pe kues foddre, and of 
heordemonne hliire, oliihnen ]?ene heiward, warien hwon me p0nt 
hire, and ^elden ]?auh J:e hermes. Wat Crist J>is is Ipdlich f>ing 

^ J)eo. 2 gederindde. ® meseise. 



ROBERT OF GLOUCESTER'S CHRONICLE £03 

hwon me ^ makeS mgne in tune of ancre eihte. pauh ^if em mot 
nede habben ku, loke pet heo ngne monne ne eilie, ne ne hermie, 
ne pet hire pouht ne beo nout p|ron ivestned. Ancre ne ouh 
nout to habben ping pet drawe utward hire heorte. N^ne 
cheffare ne drive ; ancre pet is chfapild, heo chfapeS hire soule 5 
pe chepmon of helle. Ne wite je nout in dure huse of d^er monnes 
pinges, ne eihte, ne clg^es ; ne nout ne undervo je pe chirche vesti- 
ments ^ ne pene caiis bute strencSe hit makle, gtJer miichel eie, 
vor of swUche witunge is ikumen muchel livel oftesi’Sen. WitSinnen 
ower 'svoanes ne If te nenne mon slfpen. gif muchel neode mid 10 
alle make^ brfken ower hus, pe ^ hwhle pet hit ever is ibrgken loke 
pet 36 habben pf rinne mid du gne wummon of clf ne live, deies and 
nihtes. 


V. ROBERT OF GLOUCESTER’S CHRONICLE— HOW 
THE NORMANS CAME TO ENGLAND 
Muche hafj^® pe sorwe ib^ ofte in Engelpnde, 

As 5e mo^p her and fr ih^jV and ® underslpnde, ^5 

Of mom bataile pat hap ^ ibe,"knd pat men pat Ipnd nome. 

Ve^t, as 36 habbep' ihlird, pe emperdurs of Rome, 

Supp^axans and Englisse mid batayles strpnge, 

And suppe hii of Denemarch pat hfllde it aJ ^9 Ipnge ; 

Atte laste hii of Normand^I, pat^yiaistep bep ^uthere, 20 

Wonne Im and hpldepl^t, ict olle'^ telle in wi^cb n^ere. 

' '^9 Wiliam bastard hiirdf telle of Haraldes i^&tihfcle, 

Hdu he hadde ® ymad him king and mid such falshfde, — 

Vor pat Ipnd him was ^t^^’aihe wel 

To wite hit to him wel and he wel to^fei^uste; — ^5 

me me, ® vestimenz. ® caliz. * J?eo. ® a)>. 

“ &, as often, ^ abbe]?. * icholle=s=ich wuUe. * adde. 



204 


IL THE SOUTHERN DIALECT 


As hende^he diide verst, and messagers him sende, 
pat he underslodc him bet his ^ dfde vor to amende, 

And bOBte on pe grfte Op pat he him Mdde ^ fr ydo 
To 'Wite him wel Engel§nd and to spous! his^^ do3te|^ls0, 

And hSlde him pf ro/yor^.^yarde, as he bih^t 0^ pe kinge ; 5 

And bb\e he dude liitlmShe ^volde sende him oper lidinge, 

And Veche him out ar twelfmonpe, and his^ 

pat he ne ssolde habbe^ in al EngelOnd an herne toAvfte him imrc. 

Harald him sende word pat folle it was to truste 
To siich Op as was ido mid^ strengpe, as he wel wtisfe ; lo 

Vor 5if a majdejreupe i^li3t to do an foie dfde ' 

Al One priveliche, wj^poute hire frendes rf de, . ' 

piilke vofewkrde wfre^Vor no^tl^and watloker it a^^ her, 
pat ich swdr an Op pat was al in pi poer, 

Wipow’te conseil of al pe l§nd, of ping pat min no^t nas ; 15 

pfrvOre nede OP iswgre, nede ibrOke was. 

An(^ aif pou me wolt seche in EngelOnd ne be pou no^t sO stiirne ; 
fefer pdu be bou ne ssalt me finde in npne hSrne.^ 
pg "Wiliam hiirde pat he wolde susteim his ^ tdcherie, 

He let dfsehde fiis^ kni3tes of al Normandie 20 

To conseilT him in pis casf and to heipe him in siich nede; 

And he gan of hor porchas largellch^ horn bede, 

As hii founde suppe in Engelpnd, pO it iwonne was; 

pe betere was toward him hor herte vor pis cas. 

pe Due Wiliam his^ wille amOng horn alle sfde, 25 

pat four pinges him made mfst biginna Pu\ke dfde : 

pat God wine, Haraldes fader, 

SO vllllche Alfrfd his^ cosin, and his ^ felawes alsp; 

And vor Harald hadde ^ his ^ Op ibi'Oke pat he swor mid his ^ ri3t 
hgnd, 

pat he wold^ t^is ^ bihofpe ® witie Engelgnd ; 50 

And vox Seint Edward him 3ef EngelOnd alsO ; 

And vor he was next*^ his ^ blod and best wurpe pfrto, 

1 is, as often. ^ Adde. ® abbe. * do. , ® biafje. 



205 


ROBERT OF CLOUCESTEF'S CHRONICLE 

And vor Harald nadde ng rijt bote in falshfde ; 
pes J^inges him. made mf st biginne piilke dfde. 

And vor he wolde pat alle men iseye his ^ trewehf de, 

To pe Pgpe Alisandre he sende in such cas him t 5 rfde. 

Haraldes falshfde pg pe pQpe ysey pfre, — 5 

And paraunt^;^.-me''him tplde mpre pan sop wfre, — 
pe Pgpe asoilede and blessede Wiliam and alle his 
pat into pis^pataile mid him ssolde iwis, 

And halVede his ^ baner pat me alvgre him bfre. 

p9 was he and alle his gladdore pan hii fr wfre. lo 

Sq pat pis due hadde ^ a^en hervest al ^are 

His barons and kni^tes mid him vor to fare. 

To pe havene of Sein Walrl pe due wende pg, 

Mid pe men pat he hadde ^ and abide mg. 

After hervest pg'ffipyipes and hii al pres{e wgre, 15 

And wynd ® honi c^m^fter wille^Hi^iselles mi gontie argre, 

And hiderward in pe s| wel glad pen W'ei nome, 

Sg pat ^side l^astinge to Engelgnd hii come ; 

Plorii po^te ’pg hii come a Ignd pat al was in hor hgnd. 

As sone as pe Due Wiliam his^ fot sette a Ignd, 20 

Qn of his ^ kni^tes gradde, ‘ Hgl^ v^J;^, Wiliam, nou 
Engelgnd, vor pfr nis ng king ^xyte p^ ; 

Vor siker pou be Engelgnd is nou pin iwis.^ 
pe Due Wiliam angn vorbfd alle his 

pat ngn nfre sg wod t 5 robby, ne ng maner harm do pfre 2^ 
Upe pe Ignd pat his ^ was, bote horn pat a^en him wfre, 

Al an fourtene ni^t hii bilfvede pfr aboute. 

And conseilede of batayle and ordeinede hor route. 

King Harald sat glad ynou at Euerwlk at te mfte, 

Sg pat pf r com a messager ar he hadde ^ ijf te, 30 

And sf de pat Due Wiliam to Hastinges was Icome, 

And his ^ baner hadde ^ arf rd, and pe contreie ai inome. 

^ is. ® adde. ® wynd, not in MS. ; supplied fiom MS. B and 

others. * it. 



206 


11. THE SOUTHERN DIALECT 


Harald anpn mid grfte herte corageus ynou, 

As he of n9 mon ne t9lde ]?uderward vaste he drou. 

He lie cliipTe'al his ^ folc, sg willesfol he was, 

And al for m ]?e o}?er bataile him vel sq vair cas. 

pg Due Wiliam wuste pat he was icome sg nei, 5 

A monek he sende him in message and diide as pe sley : 
pat Ignd pat him was i^ive pat he ssolde him up ^elde, \ 

Qper come and dereyni pe ri3te mid swerd in pe velde. 
jif he sf de pat he nadde ngne ri3te pf rto, 

pat, upe^pe Pgpes lokinge of Rome, he ssolde it do, lo 

And, he W9l'de pfrto stgnde al wipoute 

Wfr'^einV Edward hit him jaf, and wgr he hadd^^^lrto ri3te. 
Harald sende him word a5lH pat he nolde him take ng Ignd, 

Ne ng lokinge of Rome, bote swerd and ri3t hgnd. 

pg hit oper^he mi3te be, eiper in his ^ side 15 

Conseilede and ^arkede horn bataile vor to abide. 

pe Englisse al pe ni3t bi^^r^e bigonne to singe. 

And spende al pe ni3t in |lotonl^*and in drinkinge. 
pe Norrnans ne dude no5t sg, ac criede on God vaste, 

And ssnvi ‘horn, gch after oper, pe wule pe ni3t ylaste, 20 

And a morwe horn 1ft hoseli mid mllde herte ynou. 

And ^B]$eye' due wip his^ kgst^** toward pe bataile drou, 

An stounde he gan abide, and his ^ kni3tes rf de : 

‘ 55 kni3tes,' he sfde, 'pat bep ^ sg ngble dfde, ^ 
pat nfre nevere gvercome, ne 50ure elderne napemg, 25 

Understgndep of pe kynge^ of France pat 3dure elderne diide 
sg wg, 

Hou ml fader in Paris amidde his^ kinedom, 

Mid prowesse of 30ure faderes mid strengpe him gvercome. 
Understgndep h^ 5^re elderne pe king n5me alsg, 

And held him vorfe he hadde ^ amended pat he hadde ® misdo ; 30 
And Richard pat was pg a child iaglde Normandie, 
pat was due her^^bivgre, and pat to such maistrle 

1 is. 2 ost, as always. * kunde; other MSS. kynge. 



ROBERT OF GLOUCESTER'S CHRONICLE 


207 


pat at fche Parlem^nt pat he in Fr^ce^wfre, 
pat he wfre igiird wij? swerd pe We he wfre pgre, 

Ne pat pe King of France ne his sg hard! ngre, 

Ne ngn atte^ Parlenjent pat knlf ne swerd bgre. 

Uhcierst9ndep-|hp>e dgdes pat piilke Richard diide alsQ, 5 

pat he ne overcom no5t kinges algne, ac wel mpre pgrto^ 

Ac he overcom pe devel and adoun him caste, 

Tdgadere as hii wrastlede, and b9nd his ^ hpnden vaste ^ ; 
Bihmde at his ^ riigge ; of such prowesse ^e penche, , ■ . . 

Ne ssame 58 no3t pat Harald, pat evere was of ’Inper wreaclie, 10 
And bivgre 50U was vorswgre, pat he wolde mid his ’ taile 
T urne his ^ wgmb^qward us and his ^ face in bataile. 
Understgndep pe swIkeSom^at his ^ fader and he wro^te, 

And hii pat mid him here bep, pg hii to dgpe bro5te 

Sq villiche Alfrgd ml cosIn, and my kiinesmen alsQ. 15 

Hou mi^te in eny^-^^^ mgre ssame be ido ? 

Monie pat diide piilke dgde 50 mowe her ise ; 

Hou Ignge ssolle hor liiper hg^ed abjC^v^ hor ssoldren be ? 

Adrawep 30ure swerdes, and IdfepCwg may do best, 
pat me ise ^oure prowesse fram gst to pe west, 20 

Vor to awrgke pat gentil blod pat sg vIllTche was inome 
Of ur kiinesmen, vor we mowe wel, ur lime is nou icome/ 
pe due nojt al isgd, pat mid grnest grft 

His folc qukllG 4 ei to pe bataile" ^seft. 

A swein pat^^t Taylefer smgt vorp bivgre pgr, 25 

And slou angn an Engliss mon pat a baner bgr, 

And eftsone ® anoper baneur, and pe pridde almgst alsg, 

Ac himsQlf ® he was aslawe ar pe dgde wgre ydo. , j s. 

pe verst ende of Iris ^^^t fe^vgre Harald mid siich ginne 
Sg pikke ^ sette pat ng mon ne mijte come wipinne, 30 

Wip strgnge targ^h(^m bivgre pat archers ne diide horn no3t, 

Sg pat Normans wgre nei to grounde ibroht. 

^ is. * ef sone j other MSS. eft sone. ® horn suli*. * Jdlke. 



2o8 


IL THE SOUTHERN DIALECT 


Wiliam bif>05te an quointlse, and bigan to fie vaste. 

And his ^ folc vorf> mid him as hii wfre aghaste 
And flowe gver an Ipnge dale and sg up an hey. 
pe Engliss hgst was prout ynou pg he pis isey, 

And bigonne him to sprfde, and after pen wey nome. 5 

pe Normans wfre above pe hill, pe oper upward come, 

And biturndib hpm above al fsellche, as it wolde be donward, 

And pp dpere binfpe ne mijte no3t sg quicllche upward,^ 

And l^'wfre hiygre al tosprad pat me mi^te bitwene hto wende. 
pe Normans wfre pg wel porveid aboute in gche fnde, lo 

And stgnes adonward slonge up^^hom ynowe, 

And mid spgres and mid^gn taste of horn slowe, ^ ^ 

And mid swer.d and mid ax vor hii pat upward fi^tne. 

Ne mi3te ng wille habbe ^ of dunt as hii pat donward come, 14 

And hor vantwarde was tobrgke pat me mi^te wipinne horn wende ; 

Sg pat pe Normans vaste sl®jW.in fch ende 

Of pe Englisse al vor no^t, pat pe valeie was^nei 

As hei ifiild mid dfde men as pe d 5 une 

pe ssetare donw^d al yor ij^jt vaste slowe to grdunde, 

Sg pat Harald p'oxu ele issgte was dgpes wounde ; 20 

And a kni^t pat isei pat he was to dgpe ibro^t, 

And smgt him as he lay binfpe, and slou him as vor no^t. 

Fram pat it was a morwe pe bataile ilaste strgng, 

Vorte it was hei mid gvernon, and pat was somdfl Igng. 

Moni was pe gode diint pat Due Wiliam ^ef a day; 25 

Vor pre stedes he slou under him as me say, 

Vorpriked and vorarned aboute, and vorwounded alsg, 

And debrused a3en dfde men ar pe bataile wfre ido ; 

And 3ut was Willames grace pulke day sg god 
pat he nadde ng wounde warporu he ssedde ^ an drgpe blod. 30 
pus, Ig, pe Englisse folc vor no^t to grounde com, 

Vor a fals king pat nadde ng rijt to pe kinedom, 

^ is# agaste. * abbe. ® ssedde# 



ROBERT OF GLOUCESTER'S CHRONICLE 


And come to a nywe Igverd j^at m^re in ri^te was ; 

Ac hor ngf>er, as me may ise, in pur ri3te nas. ^ 

And f>us was in Normannes hgnd J)at Ignd ibro^t livis, 
pat an aunter ^if evermg keverin^e p^rof is. 

Of pe Normans bep heye men pat bep of Engelgnde 
And pe lowe men of Saxons, as ich understgnde, 

Sg pat 36 sep in eiper side wat ri3te 30 habbep ^ pfrto ; 

Ac ich understgnde pat it was poru Codes wille ydo. 

Vor pe wule pe men ofpisjgnd pur hgpene wfre, 

Ng Ignd ne ng folc a^en Horn in armes nfre ; 

Ac nou s^J^e pat pet folc avenge cristendom, 

And wel ISte wiile htilde pe bi^ste pat he nom, 

And tumde to sleupe and to prUte, and tg lecherle, 

To glotonle, and heye men miiche to robberle, 

As pe ggstes in a vision to Seint Edward sfde, 

Wu pfr ssolde in Engelgnd come siich wrecchfde 
Vor robberle of heie men, vor clerken hordom, 

Hdu God wolde sorwe sende in pis kinedoip. 

Bitwene Michelmasse" and Sein Luc^' feein Calixtes day, 
As vel in piilke 3fre in a Saterday, 

In pe 5fr of grace as it vel alsg 
A pbusend and sixe and sixtl pis bataile was id5. 

Due Wiliam was pg gld nyne and prittl 

An^ gn and prittl 3! r he was of Normandie due |r. 

pis bataile was ydo Due Wiliam let bringe 
^atre'^s® folc pat was aslawe an erpe poru alle pinge. 

A.lle pat wolde If ve he 3ef pat his ® fgn an erpe bro5te ; 
Haraldes moder vor hire sone wel 5erne him biso3te 
Bl messagers, and largeliche him bfd of hire ^ pinge 
To grant! hire hire sones bod! an erpe vor to bringe. 

Wiliam hit sende hire vaire inou wipoute eny ping warevgre, 
Sg pat it was poru hire, wip grft honour ybgre, 

^ abbe]). ® misselmasse. ® is. * ire. 



210 


11. THE SOUTHERN DIALECT 


To ]?e hous of Waltham, and ibro3t an erj>e ))fre 
In ]>e h§lT rode chirche pat he let himsiilf rfre, 

An hous of religion, of canons ywis. 

Hit was pfr vaire an erpe ibro^t, as it 5St is. 

Wiliam, pis ngble due, pg he hadde ^ ido al pis, 5 

pen w^y he riofei 10 Londone, he and alle his, 

As king, and prince oflgnde wip ngbleye ynou. 

A^eh him wip yair procession pat folc of toune drou, 

And underveng him vaire inou as king of pis Ignd. 

pus com, Ig, Engeignd into Normandies hgnd ; 10 

And pe Normans ne coupe spfke pg bote hor owe spgche. 

And sp|ke French as hii diide at hgm^ and hor children diide alsg 
tfche, 

Sg pat heie men of pis Ignd pat of hor blod come 
Hgldep alle piilke spf che pat hii of horn nome ; 

Vor bote a man conne French ® me tellep * of him 15 te. 15 

Ac lojve men hgldep to Engliss, and to hor owe spfehe jUte. 
Icfe--wlne ^fr ne bep in al pe world contreyes ngne 
pat ne hgldep to hor owe spfehe, bote Engeignd gne. 

Ac wel me wgt vor to conne bgpe wel it is, 

Vor pe mgre pat a mon can pe mgre wurpe he is, 20 


VI. OLD KENTISH SERMONS 
On the Calming of the Sea. 

* Ascendente Ihesu in naviculam, secuti sunt eum discipuli eius, 
Et ecce motus factus est magnus in mari ita, ut operiretur fluctibus, 
Erat autem illis ventus contrarius,' 

We redeth I pe hgli godspelle of todai pat ure Lgrd Jesu ® Crist 
yede gne time into ane ssipe and hise ® decTples mid him into pe 

^ adde. ^ om. ® Frenss, * tel]?. ® ihu. ® ise. 



OLD KENTISH SERMONS 


211 


see. And 59 hi were in Jjg ssipe, sg args a great tempeste of 
winde ; and ure Lgrd was ileid him don to slepe ine })g ssipe f r 
J^ane }?is tempeste arggs. Hise decTples hedde gi et drede of }?ise 
tempeste, sg awakede hine and seiden 15 him, ' Lgrd, save us ; for 
we perisset.' And ha wiste wel fjet hi ne hadde nocht gode 5 
beleave ine him, ]?g seide to hem, ‘ Wat dret yu, folk of litle be- 
have ? ' pg ai gs up ure Lgrd and tok pane wynd and tg see, and 
al sg rape hit was stille. And alse pg men pet weren in pg ssipe 
hedde iseghe pg miracle, sg awondrede hem michel. 

pis is si vaire miracle pet pet godspel of teday us telp \ perefgre 10 
sal ure behave bie pe betere astrengped ine swiche Lgrde pet 
siche miracle mai do, and dop wanne he wile. Ac hit is us nyede 
pet se pet sucurede hem ine pa peril, pet us sucuri ine tire niedes, 
pet we clfpTe to him pet ha us helpe. And he hit wille do 
blepeliche, yef w'e him bisecheth mercl mid good iwille, al sg 15 
himselven seith bl pe Hgll Writes, ^ Salus popiili ego sum^ ef cetera 
^ Ic ^ am,' ha seip, ‘ helere of pe folke ; w'anne hi to me clfpieth ^ ine 
hire sorghen and ine hire niedes, ic hi sucuri, and beneme hem al 
here evel -withute ende.' Grecle we t5 him merci sikerhche, yef se 
devel us wille acumbri purch senne, purch prede, gper purch anvie, 20 
gper purch wrepe, gper purch oper manere of diadlTche senne; 
grede we to him merci, and sigge we him, ‘ Lgrd, sauve us, pet we 
ne perissi,' and pet he us delivrl of alle eveles, and pet ha yef us 
swiche werkes to done in pise wordle, pet pg saulen of us mote 
blen isauved a domesdai, and ggn to pg blisce of hevene. Quod 25 
ipse prestare digneiur, etc. 

On the Parable of the Vineyard. 

‘ Simile est regnum celorum homini patrifamilias qui exiit, primo 
mane, conducere operarios in vineam suam.’ 

Ure ® Lgrd God Almichti to us spgkep ine pg hgli godespelle of 
teday, and us seaweth one forbisne pet, yef we willeth don his 

^ hie ; so in next line also. 


* clepiedh. 


® Hure. 



212 


IL THE SOUTHERN DIALECT . 


servTse, f)et we sollen habbe J>9 mede wel gnat ine hevene. For 
S9 seyth ure Lgrd ine godspelle of lodai, ]?et §n goodman was 
fjat ferst utyede ^ bT })§ moreghen for to here werkmen into his 
winyarde, for ane peny of forewerde; and al sg he hedde imad 
]?ise forewerde, sg ha sente hi into his wynyarde. Sg ha dede at 5 
undren, and at midday alsg. pg, pat hit was ayen pan even sg ha 
kam into pe marcatte, sg he fgnd werkmen pet were Idel. pg 
seyde he to hem, ‘ Wee bTe ye idel ? ' And hie answerden and 
seyde, ‘ Lgrd, for we ne fgnden tedai pat us herde/ ‘ Ggp nu/ ha 
seide, se godeman, ‘ into mine wynyarde, and ic ® pat richt is yu 10 
sal yeve/ pgs yede into pise wynyarde mid pg opre. pg pet hit 
was 'wel even®, pg seide pe Lgrd to his sergant, ‘Clfpe pg 
werkmen, and yeld hem here travail, and agyn to hem pat comen 
last, and gg al to pg ferste ; yef everiche of hem ane peny/ Se 
sergant dede pcs Lgrdes commandement, sg paide pg werkmen and 15 
yaf everich ane peny. And sg hi seghen, pg pet bi pe morghen 
waren icomen, pet hi pet waren last icume hedden here everich 
ane peny, pg wenden hi mgre habbe. pg gnichchede hi amenges 
hem, and seyden : ‘ pgs laste gn ure habbep itravailed, and pu his 
makest velaghes to us pet habbeth al deai ibye ine pine wynyarde, 20 
and habbeth * i]?gled pe berdene of pg pine, and of pg hete of al pg 
daie.' pg answerede se gode man to gn of hem: ^Frend,' ha 
seide, ‘ 1 ne do pe nggn unricht. Wat forpingketh pat ic ® do min 
iwil/ And alsg ure Lgrd hedde itgld pise forbisne, sg he seide 
efterward, ‘ Sg suUe pg verste bie last, and pg laste ferst; f|le biep 25 
iclgpede ac feawe biep icornee.' 

Nu iherep pe signefiance. pes godeman betgcknep God 
AlmichtI, ure Lgrd. Se winyard betgcknep pe serwse of ure Lgrd. 
pe werkmen betgcknep alle pg pet dop Cristes servise. pg tides 
of pe daie betgcknep pe time of pis world. Bie pe morghen $0 
iherde ure Lgrd werkmen into his winyarde pg ha sente pe 
patriarches at e begininge of pis wordle ® ine his servise, pet 

1 nutyede. ® hie. ® hi wel even, * habbej>. ® hie. 

® wordl. ^ is. 



OLD KENTISH SERMONS 


213 


Jjurch gode beleavee him servede and seden his techinge to alle J»9 
]?et hi hedden hit to siggen. Als§, at undren and at midday, 
iherede he workmen into his winyarde "pg ha sente be pg time pet 
Moyses was and Aaron ; and I pe time of his prophetes dede he 
man! god man into his servlse f>et, }?urch grlate luve to him, helden 5 
and deden his servlse. Toyenes J>an even, God Almichll ihlerde 
werkmen into his winyarde pg pzt he a last of pis wordle naam fles 
and blod ine pe maidene Seinte Marie, and seawede ine J>is world. 
pg f^nd he men f>et al day hedden ibe Idel ; werefpre he fpnd ]?et 
hepen folk, f>et be pg time pet was igp, hedden ibe ut of Codes 10 
bellave and of his luve, and of his servlse. Hi ne hedden nocht ibe 
Idel for to done pg develes werkes; ac f>erefgre seith ]:et godspel 
pet hedden ibe idel, pg pet hi nedden bileved ane God Almichti, 
ne him lovie, ne him servl. For al J>at is ine J>is wordle J>et man is, 
bote yef ha luvie God Almichti and him servl, al hit him may 15 
fenche forlpre and idelnesse. pg arfsunede ure Lgrd pe pSens be 
hise apostles, werefpre ^ hi hedden ibe sg Ipnge Idel, pg pet hi ne 
hedden ibe in his servlse. pg answerden pe paens, pet npn ne 
hedden iherd hii ; pet is t 5 sigge, J)et hi ne hedden never te iheed 
prophete, ne apostle, ne prfchur, pet hem seawde, ne hem tachte, 20 
hu hi ® solden ine Gode beleve, ne him servl. ^ Ggp,’ a seide, ure . 
Lprd, ‘ into mine winyarde, pet is into ® mine beleave, and ic * yu 
sal yfve yure peni, J?et is heveriche blisce.’ pg he]?en men ye den 
be J>a daghen into Cristes servlse. And we, J>et of hem ble]? icume 
and habbe}) cristendom underfgnge, bie]? ientred into Cristes ser- 25 
vise ; jiJerefpre we sollen habbe ure peni, f>et is fe blisce of hevene, 
al sg wel ase pg ]?et comen bi J^e morghen. For al sg we hgpie}) 
for te habbe heveriche blisce, ase pg patriarches and pg prophetes 
and pg apostles and pg gode men f>et hwilem ine pis world God 
Almichti servedeq. . 3a 

Sg as we habe]? iseid of divers wordles, J?et God Almichll dede 
werkmen into his winyarde, sg we mowe sigge of pg elde of 
everiche men. For God Almichti def? werkmen into his winyarde 
^ vrefore, ^ i. ® inte. * hie. 



214 


IL THE SOUTHERN DIALECT 


bi ])Q morghen wanne ha clfpe]? of swiche J^er blef> into his servise 
ine here chlldhfde, wanne hi of J>is world wendej> beswp ]?et hi ne 
be ine ng diadllch senne. At undren ha sent men into his win- 
yarde, pet a turnep into his servise of age of man. At middai, 
wanne pe dai is al per hgtest, betgkned pg men of prytti ^ wyntre, 5 
gper of furti, for pe nature of man is of greater strengpe and of 
greater hete ine pg age. Sg even bitgcknep elde of man, pet is se 
ende of pe live. tJre Lgrd dep werkmen into his winyarde agenes 
pg even, wanne f|le ine here elde wendep ut of here senne into 
Cristes servise. Al* sg solle hi habbe pg blisce of hevene ase pg 10 
pet ferst comen into pe winyarde Nocht forpan for pise griate 
bunte pet ure Lgrd yefp ne solde ng man targl for to wende to 
God Almichti, ne him to servi; for alsg seid pet Hgli Writ pet ngn 
ne wgt pane dai of his drape, for man mai Ignge lives wene, and 
ofte him leghep se wrench. 15 

Nu, gode men, ye habbep iherd pet godspel and pe forbisne. Nu 
lokep yef ye blep withinne pg winyarde, pet is yef^ ye biep ine 
Codes servise, yef ye blep withute diadliche senne, yef }e hatlep ® 
pat he ® hatep, yef ye luviep pet he luvep, and dop pet he hgt ; and 
bute ye do, ye biep ut of his winyarde, pet is ut of his servise. 20 
And ye dop pet ure Lgrd hggt, sg ye ofservep pane peni, pet is 
beveriche blisce, ye ofservep pet good pet nggn herte ne may 
ipenche, ne nggn yare ihere, ne tunge telle pg blisce pet God halt 
alle pg pet hine luviep. pider, Lgrd, grant! us lo cumene. Quod 
ipH prestare dlgneiur per, etc, 25 

^ XXX. ^ as. ® winyyarde. ^ Jjct yef. * hatied. 

® he he. ♦ hut. 



THE AYENBITE OF US WIT 


215 


VIL THE AYENBITE OF INWIT, OR REMORSE 
OF CONSCIENCE 

VoR TO Lyerny Sterve. 

Onnea]:e sterff) ^ Ipet ylyerned ne hej>. Lyerne to sterve, Jeanne 
sselt ^ J)Ou conne libbe ; vor ngn wel libbe, ne ssel conne, ]?et to 
sterve ylyerned ne hej), and ]?e ilke aryjt is yclfped wrechche ]?et 
ne can libbe, ne ne dar sterve. Yef }?du wylt libbe vrilTche, lyerne 
to sterve gledllche, Yef ];ou me zayst, hou me hit ssel lyerny, ich 5 
hit wyle f»e zigge an haste, pou sselt ywyte pet pis lyf ne is bote 
dyap, vor dyap is a wendinge and pet ech wgt ; and pervpre me 
zayp of ane nianne hwanne he sterfp, ‘ He went/ and hwanne he 
is dyad, ‘He is ywent.’ pis lyf alswg ne is bote a wendynge 
vorzope, vorzope a wendinge wel ssort; vor al pet lyf of ane 10 
manne, paj he levede a pbusond year, pet ne ssolde by bote pnlepy 
prikke to pe zy^pe of pe opre lyve pet evre wypoute ende ssel 
yleste, §per ine zor^e gper ine blisse wypoute endynge. pis ous 
wytnesset wel pe kyng, pe erl, pe prince, pe emperdur, pet pe 
blysse ofpe wordle hedden zomtyme, ac^ ndu ine helle wepep and 15 
gredep, yellep and zor3ep : ‘ A, alias \ hwet is ous worp oure pduer, 
worpsippe, npblesse, richesse, blisse, and bpst? Al hit ys ywent 
wel rapre panne ssed, gper vo^el vlyinde, pper quarel of arblaste. 
And pous gep al oure lyf. Nou we were ybgre, and an haste dyad ; 
ne al oure lyf nes na^t bote a lyte prikke, ndu we byep ine zor3e 20 
wypoute ende. Oure blisse is ywent into wop, dure karoles into 
zor^e ; gerlpndes, rpbes, playinges, messinges, and alle guodes byep 
^s yfayled.' Zuyche byep p§ zpnges of helle ase pe writinge ous 


^ sterf. 


- Margin, Note wel jjeme capitele. 
^ Margin, fe zang of he'le. 


^ ag, pot ip MSi 



2i6 


JL THE SOUTHERN DIALECT 


tel)>j ous vor 15 ssewy Jiet J>is lyf ne is bote a wendynge wel ssort; 
and J>is wordle ne is bote a wendynge, and libbe ne is bote a 
wcndynge. panne ne is libbe bote sterve, and pet is zop ase pater- 
noster ; vor hwanne pou begonne libbe, an haste pou begonne to 
sterve; and al pin elde, and al pine time pet ys yguo, pe dyap^pe 5 
hep ywonne and halt, pou zayst pet pou best zixti year; pe dyap 
hise hep, and neverem9 his ncle pe yelde. per\9re is pet wyt of 
pe 'vvordle folye, and pe clerk, zyinde, ne yzy3p ^^* 3 ^ 

makep Q ping, and pe niQre pet hit makep pe lesse zuq knSwep , 
alneway stervep, and hi ne conne sterve, vor day and ny^t pou 10 
sterfst, as ich pe habbe yzed. 

Yet eft ine opre manere ich pe teche pise clergle, pet pou conne 
wel libbe and wel sterve. Nou yhyer and onderstand. pe dyap 
ne is bot a todelinge of pe zaule and of pe bodye, and pet ech wel 
wgt. Nou ous tekp pe wyse Catoun: 'Lyerne we,^ zayp he, 'to 15 
sterve; todele we pane ggst of pe bodle ofte/ pet deden pe meste 
wyse of pise philosgphes pet pis lif zug moche hateden, and pe 
wordle zug moche onworpede, and zuq moche wylnede lyf na^t 
dyeadllch pet hi westen be hare wylle; ac hit nes ham na^t worp, 
vor hi ne hedden npn grace ne pe beleave of Jesu Crist, Ac pe ao 
hgly men pet lovlep God and ylevep pet, of prl dyeapes habbep pe 
Iway ypased. Vor per is dyap to zenne^ and dyap to pe wordle; 
nou abydep pane pridde dyeap, pet is pe todi^ tinge of pe zaule and 
of pe bodle. Betwene ham and Paradys ne is bote a lyte W93 pet 
hy ageltep be penchinge and be wylnynge. And yef pet bodi is of 25 
pis half, pe herte and pe gpst is of oper half, per hy habbep hyre 
blevinge, as zayp Saynte Paul, hire splas, hire blisse, and hire 
confort, and alle hire lostes. And pervpre hy hatyep pis lyf, pet ne 
is bote dyap, and wylnep pane dyap bodyllch ; vor pet is damezele 
Bfreblisse, pet is pe dyap pet alle pe hal5en corounep and dop 30 
into blisse. Dyap^ is t5 guode men ende of alle kweade, and gate 
and inguoynge of alle guode. Dyap is pe stream pet todelp dyap 
and lyf. Dyap is of pis half, llf of opre half. Ac pe wyse of pise 
5 Margin, Note wd }»ri dyafes. is.notinMS. ^ Margin, Hwipt is dyaj). 



THE AYENBITE OF INWJT 


217 


wordle, ]>ti of f>is half ]?€ streme yzyej) zug bri5te, of of>er half h! 
na5t ne yzej?, and J>erv9re his clfpej? J>e writinge foies and yblent ; 
vor fierne dya]? hi clfpie]? lyf, and fiane dyaf>, f>et is to pe guoden 
beginnynge of live, hi hit clfple]? J^an ende. And J^ervpre hy 
hatyef) zuq moche J)ane dya]?, vor hi nyte]? hwet hit is, ne of 5 
o]:er half j^e streame ne habbe]? na^t ybleved and na^t ne wpt ]?et 
but ne gejj. 

panne yef pdu wylt ywyte hwet is guod and hwet is kwead, guo 
out of J?I zelve, guo out of pe wordle, Herne to sterve. Tocfel pine 
zaule vram pe bodye be po3te ; zend pine herte into pe opre wordle, ro 
pet is to hevene, into helle, into purgatorie, per pou sselt ^ yzy hwet 
is guod and hwet is kwead. Ine helle pou sselt ® yzi mg zor5es 
panne me mo^e devisy, ine purgatorie mg tormens panne me mo^e 
pglye, ine Paradys mgre blisse panne me mo^e wylny. Helle pe 
ssel teche hou God awrgkp dyadlych zenne; purgatorie pe ssel 15 
seawy hou God clenzep vfniel zenne; ine hevene pou sselt yzy 
gpenliche hou virtues and guode dedes byep he^liche yglde. Ine 
pis pri pinges is al pet is nyed, wel to wytene hou me ssel conne 
libbe and wel sterve. Nou loke eftzone a lyte and ne tyene pe 
na5t to pise pri pinges, vor pet pou lyemest to hatye zenne. 20 
Voryet pi body gnes a day ; guo into helle ine pine libbinde, pet 
pou ne guo ine pine stervinge. pis dep ofte pe hgli man and pe 
wyse. per^ pou sselt yzy al pet herte hatep and bevly^p, and 
defiute of alle guode, ynoj of alle kweade, ver bernynde, brenstgn 
sdnkinde, tempeste brayinde, voule dyevlen, honger and porst pet 25 
me ne may na^t stgnchl, dyverse pines and wepinges and zor^es mg 
panne herte mo3e penche, ne tonge telle, and evre ssel yleste 
wypoute ende. And pervgre is pe ilke zoi^e wel yclfped dyap 
wypoute ende. And hwanne pou yzi^t pet hit behovep zug dyere 
abegge gnlepy dyadlich zenne, pe ^voidest pe rapre lete be vla^e 30 
quik panne pou dorstest t 5 gnelepi dyadliche zenne consent!. 

Efterward ^ guo into purgatorie per pou sselt yzl pe pines of pe 

1 sselelt. “ ssel. ® Margin, J)e pines of helle. 

^ Margin, Of Purgatorie. 



Sl8 II. THE SOUTHERN DIALECT 

zaules ]>et hyer hedden vorf>enchinge, ak iiere na^t volliche yclenzed. 
Nou hi dd]> )?er fte levinge of hare penonce alhwet 'pet hi bye]? 
brijte and dene ase hi weren at e poynt and at e time hwanne hi 
yeden out ^ of pe welle of cristninge. Ac ]?e ilke penonce ys wel 
grisllch and hard ; vor al pet evre jjpleden pe hply martires, o]?er 5 
wyfmen pet travayle}? of chllde, of zor^e ne ys bote a hep ine chald 
weter to pe reward of pe fornayse hwerinne berne]? pe zaules alhwet 
hi bye]) yclenzed, ase gold al yclenzed ® ine pe vere. Me ne vlnt 
lesse panne yclenzed, vor pet ver is of zuyche kende, al pet hit 
Vint ine ]?e zaule of gelte, of dede, of speche, of ]:03!:e pet ^erne]? to 10 
zenne gper llte gpei moche,- al vorbern]? and clenze}?. And per bye]? 
5^punissed and awrfke alle ^fnyal zennes, pet we clgple}? litle zennes, 
pet we dop ofte, and smale foie pontes, wordes ydele, trufies, scornes, 
and alle opre ydelnesses, alhwet hi by wor]?e to guo into hevene hwer 
ne gej? in najt bote hit by ri^t brijt. pet ilke ver dredej? pg pet by 1 5 
hare myjte ham loke}? vram dyadllch zenne, and lokep hgly.iche 
hare herten and hare bodyes and hare moupes and pe vif wyttes 
vram alle zenne, and zug libbep ase hi ssolden eche daye to dome 
come tovgre God. And ffrvgre pet ngn ne may libbe wypoute 
zenne ; vor, ase zayp Salomon, ' Zeve zipe a day valp pe guode 20 
man.’ And perv'gre, be hgly ssrifte and be tyeares and be benes, 
hi dop hare mi^te ham zelve to arere and to amend!; and ham 
zelve zug deme ]?et hi onderstgnde to vol^i pane laste dom, vor hwg 
hier him demp zopliche him ne worp ngn hede to by vorlgre at e 
daye of dome. And pus me lyernep kwead toknawe and to bevly, 25 
and alle zennes to hatye, grat ^ and smal, and onderstgnde pe hgly 
drede of God pet is beginnynge of guod lif and of alle guode. 

Ac hit ne is na3t yno^ to lete pe kweades bote me lyerny pet 
guod to done, and bote yef me zeche pe virtues, vor wypdiite ham 
ngn ari3t wel ne leyep. panne yef pou wylt lyerny wel to libbe be 30 
virtue, lyerne zug, ase ich pe habbe yzed, to sterve. Todel pine 
ggst vram pine bodye be po3te and be wylninge ; guo out of pise 
wordle stervinde ; guo into pe Ignde of pe libbynde per ngn ne 
^ ovot. ^ ychenzed. ® and grat. 



THE AYENBITE OF INWIT 


219 


sterff ne yealde]?, fet is ine Paradys. per me lyernep ^vel t 5 libbe 
an wyt and ^ corteysye, vor J^er ne may guo in ng vyleynye ; per is 
blisfolle® vela^rede of God and of angles and of ha]3en; per opwexep 
alle guodes, vayrhede, richesse, worpssippe, blisse, virtue, love, wyt, 
joye, wypoute ende ; per ne is ngn ypocrisye, ne baret, ne blgndinge, 5 
ne discord, ne envye, ne honger, ne porst, ne hete, ne chfle, ne 
kwead, ne zor^e, ne drede of vyendes, ac alneway ff stes and kinges 
bredales, zgnges and blisse wypoute ende. pe ilke blisse is zug grat 
pet hwg pet hedde ytake perof ennelepi drgpe of pe leste pinge pet 
per ys, he ssolde by of pe love of God zug dronke pet al pe blisse 10 
of pise wordle him ssolde by drede and wg; rychesses, dong; 
worpssipes, voulhede, and pe ilke. T 5 greate love pet he ssolde 
habbe to come per, him ssolde, by an hondred pouzen zipe, pe 
mgre hardillche hatye zenne and lovie virtues pet is al pe drede of 
helle hwerof ich habbe bevgre ispeke; vor love is mgre stranger 15 
panne drede. And panne is pet lyf vayr and oneste, panne me 
bevly3t pet kwead and me dep pet guod, na5t vor drede vor to by 
yspild, ac vor pe wylnynge of hevene and vor pe love of God and 
vor pe greate clennesse pet virtue hep and guod lyf. And pe ilke 
pet love ledep, he zekp rapre, and lesse him costnep, panne him 20 
pet servep God be drede. pe hare yernp, pe gryhond hym voljep, 
pe gn be drede, pe dper be wylnynge ; pe gn vly3p, pe opor hyne 
dryfp. pe holy man yernp ase grihond pet habbep al day hare 
€50 to hevene, hwer hi yzyep pe pray e pet hi drivep ; and pervgre 
hy voryetep alle dpre guodes, ase dep pe gentyl bond hwanne 25 
ha zyp his praye tovgre his e5en. 

pis is pet lyf of pe wel lovlynde of gentil herte and affayted, pet 
zug moche lovyep virtue and hatyep zenne pet, yef hi weren zykere 
pet me ne ssolde his conne ne God ne ssolde his awrfke, ham ne 
daynede najt t 5 do zenne; ac al hare penchinges and al hare 30 
wyllis hire herten clenllche loki and agraypi pet hi by worpi to 
habbe pe blisse of Paradys, hwer ng cherl ne ssel come in, ne 
vals, ne pyef, ne proud, vor pe worse ssolde by pe vela3]rede. 

^ sterf. ® and wyt an, ® MajTgin, Of f e, bl^s^ pf paradis* 



220 


//. THE SOUTHERN DIALECT 


VIII. TREVISA'S TRANSLATION OF HIGDEN’S 
POLYCHRONICON 

Book I, Chapter LVIIL The Inhabitants of Britain. 

Bryt5ns wonede fiirst in Jjis ylpnd ]>e of Hely J?e preost 
ey^tetene; of Silvius Posthumus, King of Latyns, enlevene; after 
pe takyng of Troye J>re and fourty ^fre ^ ; tolgre pe biildynge of 
Rome foure hondred and t\v§ and thryty. Hy ^ come hyder and ® 
tok here cours fram Armoryc J>at * now ys pe o]?er ® Brytayn ; hy 5 
hSld l^ng tyme pQ sou}) contrays of pQ Jdpnd, Hyt byfSl afterward 
in Vespasian hys tyme, Duk of Rome, pd,t ])e Pictes out of Scitia ® 
schipede into occean, and wfre ydryve aboute wi]? pe wynd and 
entrede into pe nor]? cgstes of Irlgnd, and fpnd }?|r Scottes and 
prayede for to have a place to wony ynne, and my^te ngn gete ; 10 
for Yrlgnd, as Scottes seyde, my^te no^t susteyne hgpe people. 
Scottes sende pe Pictes to pe nor]) sydes of Britayn, and byheet 
ham help a^enes pe Britons fat wgre enemyes ^if hy wolde aryse, 
and tok ham to wyves of here dou3tres apon siich condicion : jif 
dduteful whg scholde have ry^t for to be kyng, a scholde ra])er 15 
cbeose ham a kyng of ])e moder syde fan of f e fader syde, of f e 
wymmen kyn rafer fan of fe men kyn. Yn^ Vespasian fe 
emperor ® hys tyme, whan M^ius Arviragus hys sone was kyng of 
Britons, gn Rodric, Kyng of Pictes, com out of Scitia and gan to 
destruye Scotlgnd. panne Marius fe kyng slou^ f is Rodric and 20 
^af f e norf party of Scotland, fat hatte Cathenesia, to f e men fat 
wfr ycome wif Rodric and wfre gvercome wif hym, for to wone 

^ jere not in MS. ® Beda, libro prime, before sentence as authority 
for statement ; so in other cases of authorities. ® &, as often. ^ ])t, as 

usual. ® poper, ® Scicia, as always, ’ Gaufridus before sentence, 

® pempor, with abbreviation for ur, or. 



HIGDElSrS POLYCHROmCON 


221 


ynne. Bote }:eos men hadde ng wyves, ne ngn my^te habbe of J?e 
nacion of Britons ; ]:grfgre by seylede into Yrlgnd, and tok ham 
to ^ wj^^es Yryschmen dorters, at j^at covenannt fat fe moder blod 
scholde be put tofgre yn succession of heritage. Ngf elfs ® Servius ® 
super Vergilium seif fat Pictes bSf Agatirses fat hadde som wonyng 5 
places aboute fe wateres of Scitia, and a btif yclfpud Pictes 
bycause of peyntyng and smyttyng of wondes fat biif ysene on her 
bodies ; for hy hadde muche dem, and wfr ofte boistouslych ylete 
blod and hadde meny wondes ysene on here body, sg fat hy semede 
as hyt wfre men ypeynt wif wondes; ffrfgre a wgre yclfpud 10 
Pictes, as hyt wf re peynted ^ men. peose men and f e Ggtes biif 
al gn people; for whanne Maximus fe tiraunt was awent out of 
Britayn into Fraunce for to occuple f e empere,® fanne Gratianus 
and Valentinianus, fat wfre breferen® and felowes of fe emperor, 
brou3te feose Ggtlies out of Scitia wif grft jeftes, wif flatryng and 15 
fair byhestesj into f e north contrays of Britayn, for a wfr stalworf 
and strgng men of armes, and sende ham by schipes to werre apon 
fe Britons fat wfr f g naked and baar, wif oute kny^tes and men 
of armes. And sg f eoves and bribers wfr ymad men of Ignd and 
of contray, and wonede in f e norf contrayes and biilde f fr cites 20 
and tounes. Carausius"^ fe tiraunt slouj Bassianus by help and 
trfson of f e Pictes fat come in help and socour of Bassianus, and 
^af fe Pictes a wonyng place in Albania, fat ys Scotlgnd. par 
fay wonede Igng tyme afterward, ymelled wif Brytons. panne 
sef f e ® fat Pictes occupiede raf er f e norf syde of Scotlgnd, hyt 25 
semef fat f e wonyng place fat f is ® Carausius ^af ham ys f e souf 
syde of Scotlgnd fat strechchef fram f e f wartgver wal of Romayn 
work to fe Scottysch sf, and conteynef Galway and Lodovia, 
Lodway. pfrof Bfda, lihro ieriio, capiiulo secundo, spfkef in fis 
manere : Ninian, f e hgly man, convertede fe souf Pictes ; after- 30 
ward f e Saxons come and made fat contray Ignge to Brenicia, f e 
norf party of Norfiimberlgnd, forto fat Kynadius, Alpinus hys 

^ two. 2 Giraldus. ® Sirvius. * peynlud. ® ])einpere, as in next line, 

® brejeron. ^ Gaufridus. ® seftlie. ® ]?es. 



//. THE SOUTHERN DIALECT 


sone, kyng of Scotlgnd, put out ]?e Pictes and made ]?at contray 
fiat 3's bytwene Twede and ] 3 e Scottysch sf Ignge to hys kyngdom. 
Aftenvaid^ Igiig lyme |)e Scottes wfr ylad by Duk Reuda and 
come out of Yrlgnd, fiat ys fie propre contray of Scottes, and wif> 
love gfer with strengthe made ham a place fast by fie Pictes, in fe 5 
norf syde of fat arm of f e sf fat brfkef into f e Ignd in f e west 
syde, fat departede in gld tyme bytwene Britons and Pictes. Of 
fis Duk Reuda fe Scottes hadde fe name, and wfr yclfped 
Dalreudlnes, as hyt wfre Reuda hys pait, for in here speche a part 
ys yclfped dah j>e^ Pictes my^t have ng vyves ofBiitons, bote lo 
fay tok ham wyves of Yrisch Scottes and b^jeode ham fair for to 
wony wif ham, and grauntede ham a Ignd by fe sf syde far f e sf ys 
narow”; fat Ignd now hatte Galway. Yrisch® Scottes Igndede at 
Argail, fat is Scottene clyf, for Scottes Igndede fare for to harmye 
fe Britons gfer for fat place ys next to Yrlgnd for to come algnd 15 
in Britayn. And^ sg fe Scottes, after Britons and Pictes, made 
f e fridde maner people wonyng in Bretayn. 

panne after fat come f e Saxons, at f e prayng of f e Britons, to 
heipe ham a^fnes fe Scottes and fe Pictes. And f e Britons wfr 
yput out angn to Wales, and Saxons occupied fe Ignd lytel and 20 
lytel, and eft mgre and mgre, strey^t angn to f e Scottysch sf ; and 
sg Saxons made fe furf e maner of men in f e ylgnd of Britayn. 
For ® Saxons and Angles come out of Germania ; ^et som Britons 
fat wonef ny^ clfpef ham schortlych Germans. Ngfelfs, abbute 
f e 5fr of oure Lgrd ey^te hondred, Egbertus, kyng of West Saxon, 25 
comaundede and heet clfpe al men of fe Ignd Englyschmen. 
panne ® after fat f e Danes pursued fe Ignd aboute an twg hondred 
5fr, fat ys to mfnyng fram f e forseyde Egbert hys lyme angn to 
Seint Edward hys tyme, and made fe fyfte maner people in f e 
ylgnd, bote hy failede afterward. At te laste come Normans under 30 
Duk William and suduwede Englyschmen, and jet hgidef f e Ignd ; 

^ Beda, libro quinto, capitulo quinto. ® Giraldus, distinctio primsu 

2 Marianas. * Beda. ® Beda, libro quinto, capitulo quinto. 

® Alfridus, ^ puTSUwed. 



HIGDEN^S POLYCHROmCON 


223 


and hy made pe syxte people in pe ylgnd. Bote in f>e fiirste Kyng 
Henry hys tyme come meny Flemmyngs and feng a wonyng place 
for a lyme bysides Mailrgs, in pQ west syde of Engelgnd, and made 
pQ sevef>e people in pe ylgnd. Ngj^elgs, by hfste of pe same kyng, 
a wgr yhgve J^ennes and yput to Haverford hys syde, in pe west 5 
syde of Wales. And s<5 now in Brytayn Danes and Pictes failef) 
al out, and iyf nacions wone)? pfrynne : ]?at btij? Scottes in Albania, 
J>at ys Scotlgnd ; Britons in Cambria, ]?at ys Wales, bote pol Flem- 
myngs wone]? yn West Wales; and Normans and Englyschmen 
ymelled yn al pe ylgnd. For hyt ys ng doute in stgryes how^ and 10 
in what manere pe Danes wfr yputt away ?.nd destroyed out of 
Britayn ; now hyt ys to declaryng how J?e Pictes ^ wfr destruyd and 
faylede. 

Britayn ® was somtyme occupied with Saxons, and pfs was ymad 
and ystabled wip pe Pictes. panne pe Scottes pat come wip pe 15 
Pictes sye pat pe Pictes pey wfre^ l§§s pan pe Scottes, and wfr 
ngbler of dfdes and bettre men of armes pan wfr pe Scottes, panne 
pe Scottes turnde to here kfinde trfsons pat hy usep ofte, for in 
trfson a passep opere men and bSp traitours as hyt wgr by kSnde. 
For pay prayde to a feste al pe grfte of pe Pictes, and weytede here 20 
tyme whanne pe Pictes w|r at |se and mery, and hadde wel ydronhe®, 
and drou3 out -nayles pat h 3 ld up pe holou^ benches under pe 
Pictes, and pe Pictes sodeynlych and unwar fel gver pe hammes 
into a wonder ptiifal. panne pe Scottes fiil on pe Pictes and slou^ 
ham. and lefte ngn alyve ; and sg of pe twey people fe better 35 
werriour was hglych destruyd. Bote pe oper pat bUp pe Scottes 
pat wfre wel unlych to pe Pictes, tok profyt by pat fals tr|sdn ; for 
a tok al pat Ignd and hgideth hyt ^et hederto, and elfpep hyt Scot- 
lgnd after here oune name, pat tyme, pat was in Kyng Edgar 
hys tyme, Kynadius, Alpinus hys sone, was Ifdar of Scottes, an<i 30 
werrede in Picte Ignd and destruyde pe Pictes; he werrede six 

^ hon5. 2 pittes, as also in 1 . 1 5. ® Giraldns, dislinctiohe jirima, 

capitulb septimo decimo. •* awere. ^ ydrongke. ® J?o3)ex. 



224 SOUTHERN DIALECT 

S7f>es in Saxon, and tok al J^e l§nd ]?at ys bytwene Twede and “pe 
Scottysch s| wij) wigng and wi]? strengthen 


Chapter LIX. On the Languages of the Inhabitants. 

As hyt ys yknowe hou^ meny maner people biijj in f>is yl^nd, J)fr 
bSj> alsg of sg meny people Igngages and tonges ; ngf>elfs Walsch- 
men and Scottes, ]?at bU]? no^t ymelled wij) 6]:er nacions, hglde]? 5 
wel ny5 here furste Igngage and spfche, bote ^ef Scottes ]?at ^vfre 
som tyme confederat and wonede wij) pe Pictes dra^ve somwhat 
after here spfche. Bote pe Flemmynges, p2it wone]? in pe west syde 
of Wales, habbe]? yleft here strange spf che and spgke]? Saxonlych 
ynow. Alsg Englysch men, pey^ hyhadde fram pe bygynnyng pre 10 
maner spfche, sou]?eron, nor]?eron, and myddel spfche, in pe 
myddel of pe Ignd, as hy come of f»re maner people of Germania, 
ng|?el§s, by commyxstion andmellyngfiirst mp Danes and afterward 
mp Normans, in menye pe contray Igngage ys apeyred, and som 
usep strange wlaffyng, chyteryng, harryng and garryng, grisbittyng. 15 
pis apeyryng of pe burptonge ys bycause of twey pinges. Qn ys, 
for chyldern in scole, a3enes pe usage and manere of al oper 
nacions, bflp compelled for to Ifve here oune Igngage and for to 
construe here lessons and here pinges a Freynsch, and habbep 
siipthe pe Normans come fiirst into Engelgnd. Alsg gentilmen 20 
children bfip ytau^t for to spgke Freynsch fram tyme pat 5 bSp 
yrokked in here cradel, and connep spfke and playe wip a child 
hys brouch; and uplgndysch^ men 'wol lykne hamsylf to gentil- 
men, and fgndep wip grgt bysynes for to spgke Freynsch for to be 
mgre ytgld of. 25 

pys * manere was moche yused tofgre pe furste moreyn, and ys 
septhe somd|l ychaunged. For Jghan* Cornwal, a mayster of 
gramere, chayngede pe Igre in gramerscole and construccion of 
Freynsch into Englysch ; and Richard Pencrych lurnede pat manere 
tfchyng of hym, and oper men of Pencrych, sg pat now, pe jfr of 30 
^ oplondysch. ® Trevisa, indicating addition by translator, ® lohan. 



HIGDEN^S POLYCHRONICON 


225 


oure Lgrd a )>ousond J)re hondred foure scgre and fyve, of fe 
secunde Kyng Richard after J>e conquest nyne, in al J?e gramer- 
scoles of Engeignd childern l§ve]? Frensch and construe]? and 
lurnej? an Englysch, and habbe]? ferby avauntage in gn syde and 
desavauntage yn an6]?er. Here avauntage ys, ]?at a lurnej? here 5 
gramer yn lasse tyme ]?an childern wf r ywoned to do ; disavauntage 
ys, }?at now childern of gramerscole connej? ng mgre Frensch }?an 
can here lift heele, and ]?at ys harm for ham and a scholle passe ]?e sg 
and travayle in sti ange Igndes, and in meny caas alsg. Alsg gentilmen 
habbej? now moche yleft for to tfche here childern Frensch. 10 

Hyt semej) a grft wonder hou ^ Englysch, ]?atys J>e bur]?tonge of 
Englysch men and here oune lgng%e and tonge, ys sg dy vers of soun** 
in ]?is ylgnd ; and J)e Igngage of Normandy ys comlyng of ano]?er 
Ignd, and ha]? gn maner soun ® among al men J?at spfke]? hyt ary^t in 
Engeignd. Ng]?elfsM?gr ys as meny dyvtrs maner Frensch yn ]?e 15 
rfm of Fraunce as ys djwers maner e Englysch in J>e rgm of 
Engeignd. Alsg, of ]?e forseyde Saxon tonge, ]?at ys dfled a ]?re 
and ys abyde scarslych wi]? feaw uplgndysch men, and ys grft 
wondur ; for men of ]?e gst wi]? men of J?e west, as hyt wgre undur 
]?e same party of hevene, acorde]? mgre in sounyng of spgche }>an 20 
men of ]?e nor]? wi]? men of ]?e sou]?, pgrlgre hyt ys J?at Mercii, 

]?at bS|?, men of myddel Engeignd, as hyt wfre parteners of ]?e endes, 
understgndej? betre }?e syde IgngSges, nor]?eron and s6u]?eron, ]?an 
nor]?eron and sou]?eron understgndej? ey]?er o]?er. Al * ]?e IgngSge 
of ^e Nor]?humbres, and specialych at gork, ys sg scharp, slyttyng 25 
and frgtyng and unschape, ]?at w 5 sou]?eron men may ]?at Igngage 
unnf)?e understgnde. Y trowe }?at ]?at ys bycause ]?at a bd]? ny3 to 
strange men and aliens ]?at spgke^ strangelych, and alsg bycause 
J?at ]?e kynges of Engeignd wone]? alwey fer fram }?at contray ; for 
, a bU]? mgre yturnd to ]?e sou]? contray, and ^ef a ggj? to J?e nor]? 30 
. contray a gg]? wi]? grft help and strengtlie, pe cause why 3 . bd]? 
mgre in'pe sou]? contray pan in pe norp may be betre cdmlgnd, 

^ mgre people, mgre ngble cytes, and mgre profytable havenes. 

1 houj. ^ soon. ® Trevisa. * Willelmus de Pontificalibus, libro tertio. 

Q 



THE DIALECT OF LONDON 

I. THE ENGLISH PROCLAMATION OF HENRY 
THIRD 

Henri J^urj Godes fultume King on Engleneloande, Lhoaverd 
on Yrloahde, Duk on Normandl, on Aquitaine, and Eorl on Anjow, 
send igretinge to alle hise holde, il^rde and ilfawede, on Hunten- 
doneschire : ]?3et witen 50 wel alle ptet we willen and unnen ]?2et 
J>2et ure r^desmen alle, gptr f>e moare d»l of heom Jjset beoj) 5 
ichgsen tis and J?ur3 ]?8et loandes folk on ure ktlnerlche, 
habbetJ idon and shullen don in }>e wor]?nesse of Gode and on ure 
treow)>e, for ]pe frfme of )>e loande pe besi3te of pm tofgren- 
iseide rfdesmen, beo stfdefaest and ilfstinde in alle Jjinge abuten 
aende. And we hoaten alle ure treowe in ]pe treowJ»e p$st heo us 10 
qjen, ]?aet heo stfdefaestliche hfalden and swfrien td h^alden and to 
rieh pg isetnesses ]? 3 et beon imakede and beon to maklen, f>ur5 
pm tofqreniseide rfdesmen, 9f>er Jpurj po moare d«l of heom 
alsw9 alse hit is bifgren iseid; and p2di. »ch® oper helpe paet for to 
done bl J^'an ilche pj^e a^fnes alle men ri5t for to done and 16 15 
foangen. And noan ne nime of loande ne of e^te whfrfur^ ]?is 
besi^te muge beon ilet gpei iwersed on pnle wise. And jif gtn 
^per §nTe cumen her onlines, we willen and hoaten f>ast alle ure 
treowe heom'hfalden dfadliche ifoan. And for J^aet we willen p^t 
]?is beo stfdefaest and Ifstinde, we senden ^ew J>is writ §pen, iseined 20 
wi}? ure s§§I, to halden amanges ^eiv ine hord. ■ Witnesse us selveh 
Lundene j^ane e5teten})e day on j^e monpe ‘of OctObre, in p^ 
tw9 and fowerti3]?e ^fare of dre cruninge* And J^is wes idon 
^tfgren ure iswprene rfdesmen, Boneface Archebischop on Kahte- 


1 Henr». 


® seiic. 



ADAM DAVYDS DREAMS 


227 


burl \ Walter ^ of Cantelow, Bischop on Wirechestre, Simon ® of 
Muntfortj^orl on Leirchestre, Richard^ of Clare, Eorl on Glow* 
chestre and on Hurtford, Roger® Bigod, Eorl on Northfolke 
and Marescal on Engleneloande, Perres of Savveye, Willelm ^ of 
Fort, Eorl on Aiibemarle, Jghan of Plesseiz, Eorl on Warewlk, 5 
Jphan'^ GefFrees sune, Perres of Muntfort, Richard^ of Grey, 
Roger® of Mortemer, James of Aldithele®*^, and setfgren o]?re ino5e. 

And al on pg ilche worden is isend into »vrlche ® o]?re schire 
'9ver al ]3»re kiinerlche on Engleneloande, and |k intel Irelgnde. 


IL ADAM DAVY’S DREAMS ABOUT EDWARD II 

To oure Lprde Jgsu®'* Crist in hevene 
Ich today shewe myne swevene, 
pat ich mette in gne nijht * 

Of a knight of mychel ini^ht ; 

His name is ihgte Sir Edward pe Kyng, 

Prince of Wales, Engelgnde pe faire ping. 

Me mette pat he was armed wel 
Bgpe wip frne and’® wip ^tel, 

And on his helme pat was of st§l 
A coroune of gold bicom hyin Vel. 

Bifgre pe shryne of Seint Edward he stood, 

Myd glad chere and rhylde of mood, 

Alid twg 'kni5ttes armed on eiper side 
pat he ne mi^ht pennes ggg ne ride. 

Hetillch hii leiden hyta upon 
Als hii mijtten myd swerd$^* ‘don. 

1 ICant’ bur.* « Walt.' s sim,* * Ric.’ " Rog.’ 

® Will.’ loh.’ * aevrihce. Alditbel Ihu, as usual. 

® nijth; to ^ht Ih’^l words. ^ &,^as often. sWerd. 

Q 5 




IL THE DIALECT OF LONDON 


He stood ]?fre wel swi]:e stille, 

And fiQled al togedres her wille ; 

Ne strggk ne ^af he a^einward 
To yak ]?at hym wfren wij^erward. 

Wounde ne was j^fre blody ngn, 

Of al fiat hym J^gre was don. 

After fiat me f>ou3ht ongn, 

As f>e tweie kni3ltes wgren ggn, 

In eifer gre of oure kyng, 
pfre sprgnge out a wel fare fing. 

Hii wexen out sg bri3ht sg glgm 
pat shyne'S ofpe sonnebfm. 

Of divers coloures hii wfren 
pat comen out of bgf e his gren ; 

Foure ^ bendes alle by rewe on eifer gre 
Of divers colours, rgd and white als hii wgre ; - 
Als fer as me f ou3ht ^ ich mi3ht see 
Hii spredden fer and wyde in. f e cuntre. 

Forsofe me mette fis ilke ® swevene — 

Ich take to witnesse God of hevene— 
pe Wedenysday bifgre fe decollacioun of Seint Jgn, 
It is mgre fan twelve mdnef ggn. 

God me graunte sg heveneblis, 

As me mette fis swevene as it is. 

Now God fat is Hevenekyng, 

To mychel joye tourne fis mgtyng. 

Anofer swevene me mette on a Tiwesni3ht, 

Bifgre f e fgst of alle halewen, of fat ilk kni3ht, 

His name is nempned here bifgre ; — - 
Blissed be f e tyme fat he was bgre ; 

For we shullen fe day see, 

Emperour ychgsen he worf e of cristiente. 

God us graunte fat ilke ® bone, 

^ fifonre; ff-F, as occasionally. * ])ou. ® ilk. 



ADAM DAVy*S DREAMS 


pat pilke ^ tydyng here we sone 
Of Sir Edward cure derworp kyng. 

Ich mette of hym anopere fair mf tyng : 

To cure Lgrde of hevene ich telle pis, 
pat my swevene tourne to mychel blis. 

Me pou^ht he rggd upon an asse. 

And pat ich take God to witnesse ; 

Ywonden he w^as in a mantel gray ; 

Toward Rome he nom his way. 

Upon his hevede sat an gray hure, 

It seined hym wel amfsure. 

He rggd wiputen hgse and sho, 

His Avone was nou5ht sg for to do; 

His shankes semeden al bloodrfde ; 

Myne herte wep for grgte drfde. 

Als a pilgryme he rggd to Rome, 

And pider he com wel swipe sone. 

pe pride ^ swevene me mette a nijht 
Rijht of pat derworpe knight; 
pe Wedenysday a nijht it was 
Next pe day of Seint Lucie bifgre Cristenmesse. 
Ich sbewe pis, God of hevene, 

To mychel joye he t^rne my sw’evene. 

Me pou^ht pat ich was at Rome, 

And pider ich com swipe sone ; 
pe Pgpe and Sir Edward, cure kyng, 

Bgpe hii hadden a newe dubbyng. 

Hure gray was her clgping ; 

Of opere clgpes se|3 ich ngping. 

pe Pgpe ^ede bifgre, mytred wel faire iwys, 

pe Kyng Edward com corouned myd gr|r blis ; 

pat bitgknep he shal be 

Emperour in cristianete. 

1 >ilk. ® prid. 



230 


IL THE DIALECT OF LONDON 


Jesus Crist, ful of grace, 

Graunte oure kyng in every place 
Maistrie of his wij^erwynes, 

And of alle wicked Sarasynes. 

Me met a swevene on worj^ingni^ht, 

Of ]?at ilche derworpe knight ; 

God ich it shewe, and t5 witnesse lake. 

And SQ shllde me frg synne and sake. 

Into an chapel ich com of our L|fdy; 

Jesus Crist, hire leve son, stood by ; 

On rode he was, an lovelich man 
Als ]?ilke ^ Jjat on rode was don. 

He unneiled his hgnden twp, 

And seide wif) J>e kni 3 ht he wolde gp : 

' Maiden and moder and mylde quene, 

Ich mote' my knight today sene. 

Leve moder, jive me Ifve, 

For ich ne may np lenger bilf ve ; 

Ich mote convej^e ]?at ilke knijht 
pat us hap served day and nijht ; 

In pilerinage he wil gpn. 

To ben ^ awrfke of oure fpn.' 

‘ Leve son, joure wille sp mote it be, 

For pe knijht bppe day and nijht hap served me, 
Bppe at oure wille wel faire iwys, 
pf rfpre he hap served heveneriche blis.' 

God pat is in hevene sp brijht, 

Be wip dure kyng bppe day and nijht. 

Amen, amen, sp mote it be ; 

pf rtd biddep a paternoster and an ave. ‘ 

Adam pe marchal of Stretford-atte-Bowe, 

Wel swipe wide his name is yknowe, 

He hymself mette pis mf tyng, 

' >illc, 2 bien. 



ADAM DAVY'S DREAMS 


231. 


To witnesse he take]? Jesu, hevenekyng ; 

On Wedenysday in clfne leinte, 

A voice me bf de 1 ne shulde nou3ht feinte ; 

Of ]?e swevenes ]?at her ben write, 

1 shulde swi]?e don my Igrde kyng to wite. 5 

Ich answerde pat 1 ne m^ht for derk ggn. 

pe vois me bad ggg, for li^ht ne shuld ich faile ngn. 

And pat I ne shulde lette for ngping, 
pat ich shulde shewe pe kyng my m|tyng. 

Forp ich went swipe ongn, 10 

®stward as me pou^ht ich mijht ggn ; 
pe li5ht of hevene me com to. 

As ich in my waye shulde gg. 

Lgrd, my body ich jelde pee to. 

What 50ure wille is wip me to do. J 5 

Ich take to witnesse God of hevene, 
pat soplich ich mette pis ilche swevene ; 

I ne reiche what ^ee myd my body do, 

Als wissellch Jesus of hevene my soule undergo*' 

pe pursday next pe bfryng of oure Lffdy, 20 

Me pou3ht an aungel com Sir Edward by; 
pe aungel bitook Sir Edward on hgnde, 

A 1 bledyng pe foure forper clawes sg wf re of pe Egmbe. 

At Caunterbiry, bifgre pe hei3e autere, pe kyng stood, 

Yclgped al in r|de murre he was of pat blee rgd as blood. 25 
God, pat was on gode Friday don on pe rode, 

So lurne my swevene ni3ht and day to mychel gode. 

Tweye poynts ^ pf re ben pat ben unshewed 
For me ne worpe to clerk ne lewed ; 

Bot to Sir Edward oure kyng, zo 

Hym wil ich shewe pilk mgtyng. 
ich telle 50U, forsope %yipouten Ifs, 

Als Ggd of hevene maide Marie to mpder chgs, 

1 m^re. ^ poyntz. 



//. THE DIALECT OF LONDON 


232 


pe aungel com to me, Adam Davy, and sfde, 

^ Bot pou, Adam, she we pis, pee worpe wel yvel mede.’ 

I shewe 30U pis ilk m^tyng, 

As pe aungel it shewed me in a visioun ; 

Bot pis tgkenyng bifalle, SQ doop me into prisoun. 5 

Lprde, my body is to ^oure wille ^ ; 
pei3 jee willep me pfrfgre spille, 

Ich it wil take in pplemodenesse, 

Als God graunte us heveneblisse ; 

And Ifte us nevere pfrof mysse, 10 

pat we ne moten pider wende in clennesse. 

Amen, Amen, sp mote it be, 

And Ifte us nevere to opere waye tee. 

WhQSQ wil spfke myd me, Adam pe marchal, 

In Stretforpe-Bowe he is yknowe and pvere al \ 15 

Ich ne shewe nou3ht pis for 15 have mede, 

Bot for God Almi3ttles drede, 

For it is soop. 


III. THE FIRST PETITION TO PARLIAMENT IN 
ENGLISH 

To* the mgpst npble and * worthiest Iprdes, mppst ryghtful and 
wysest Conseille to owre lige Lprde the Kyng, compleynen, if it lyke 20 
to yow, the folk of the Mercerye of London as ^ a membre of the 
sSme citee, of many wrpnges subtiles and alsQ ppen oppressions 3' do 
to hem by Ipnge tyme here bifpre passed. Of which ppn was, whfre 
the eleccion of mairaltee is to be to the fremen of the citee bi gode 
and paisible avys of the wysest .and trewest, at 9 day in the,yfre 35 
frelich,-— thfre, noughtwithstpndyng the same fredam or fraunchlse, 

^ willelle* 8 T. ® 3, as usual, < as not in MS. 



FIRST ENGLISH PETITION TO PARLIAMENT 233 

Nicholas^ Brembre wyth his upbfr^rs proposed hym, the y§re 
next after Jghn ^ Northampton mair of the same citee with strange 
hgnde as it is ful knowen, and thourgh debate and strenger partye 
ayeins the p^^s bifpre purveyde was chgsen mair, in destniccion 
of many ryght. For in the same yf re the forsaid Nicholus, withouten 5 
nede, ayein the p§§s made dyverse enarmynges bi day and gke bi 
nyght, and destruyd the Kynges trewe lyges, som with §pen 
slaughtre, somme® bi false emprisonementz ; and some iledde the 
citee for f§§re, as it is gpenllch knowen. 

And s§ ferthermgre for to susteyne thise wrgnges and many 10 
othere, the next ygre’ after the same Nicholus, ayeins the forsaide 
fredam and trewe communes ^ did crye gpenllch that ng man 
sholde come to chese her mair but such as wgre sompned, and 
thg that wgre sompned wf re of his ordynaunce and after his avys. 
And in the nyght next after folwynge he did carye grgte quantitee 15 
of armure to the guyldehalle, ^fith which as wel straungers of the 
contree as othere of withinne wgre armed on the morwe ayeins 
his owne proclamacidn, that was such that ng man shulde be 
armed; and certein busshmentz wgre laide that, when freemen of 
the citee come to chese her mair, brfken up armed crjnnge with 20 
loude voice ‘ SIf , slf folwyng hem ; whgrthourgh the peple for fg^re 
fledde to houses and other hidynges as in Ignde of werre adradde 
to be df d in commune 

And thus yet hiderward hath the mairaltee ben hglden as it 
wgre of conquest or maistrye, and many othere offices als, sg that 25 
what man, pryve or apert in special that he myghte wyte grocchyng, 
pleyned or helde ayeins any of his wrgnges or bi puttyng forth of 
whgmsg it wfre, wfre it never sg unprenable, w|re apfched and it 
wfre displgsyng to hym Nicholus, angn was emprisoned and, though 
it w|re ayeins falshfde of the Iggst officer that hym liist meyn- 30 
teigne, was hglden untrewe llgeman to owre Kyng; for whg 

* Nichol, generally with a curl indicating ns. * John, with crossed h. 

* some, with macron over m. * coes, with curve over 0. nges. 

’ coe, with curve over o. 



//. THE DIALECT OF LONDON 


234 

reproved such an officer, maynteigned by hym, of wrpnge or elles, 
he forfaited ayeins hym Nicholus and he, unworthy as he saide, 
represented the Kynges estat. AIsq if any man bicause of servyce 
or other Ifveful comaundement apprgched a Igrde, to which 
Igrde he, Nicholus ^ dradde his falshfde to be knowe to, angn was 5 
apiched that he was false to the conseille of the citee and sg to 
the Kyng. 

And yif in general his falsenesse were ayeinsaide, as of us 
togydre of the Mercerye or othere craftes, or gny conseille wolde 
have taken to ayeinstande it, or,— as tyme ^ out of mynde, hath 10 
be used,— wolden companye togydre, how lawful sg it w?re for 
owre nede or profite, we® wfre angn apfched for arrysfrs ayeins 
the pg§s, and falsly many of us of^ that yet stgnden endUed. 
And we ben gpenlich disclaundred, hglden untrewe and traitours 
to owre Kyng; for the same Nicholus sayd bifgr mair, aldem^en, 15 
and owre craft bifgr hem gadred in^ place of recorde, that twenty 
or thirty ® of us wf re worthy to be drawen and hanged, the which 
thyng lyke to you’re worthy Igrdship by an fven juge to be 
proved or disproved the whether that trowthe may shewe ; for 
trouthe amgnges us of fewe or elles ng man many day dorst be 20 
shewed ; and nought ggnllch unshewed or hidde it hath be by man 
now, but alsg of bilgre lyme the mggst profitable poyntes of trewe 
governaunce of the citee, compiled togidre bi Ignge labour of 
discrete and wyse men, wythout conseille of trewe men, — for ihei 
sholde nought be knowen ne contynued, — in the tyme of Nicholus Z5 
Exton, mair, outerllche wfre brent. 

And sg fer forth falsehfde hath be used that oft tyme he, 
Nicholus Brembre, saide, in sustenaunce of his falshfde, owre lige 
Igrdes wille was such that never was such, as suppgse. He 
saide alsg, whan he hadde disclaundred us, which of us wolde 30 
yelde hym false to his Kyng, the Kjmg sholde do hym grace, 
cherise hym, and be good Lgrde to hym ; and if any of us alle, 

■ 1 Nich, with curl indicating abbreviatio^ii. * t Jme, not in MS. ® we, 

not in MS. * of, not in MS. * xx or xxx. 



FIRST ENGLISH PETITION TO PARLIAMENT 235 


that wyth Goddes help have and shulle be foiinden trewe, was s§ 
hardy to profre provyng of hymself trewe, anpn \vas comaunded 
to prisone as wel bi the mair that now is, as of hym, Nicholus 
Brembre, bifpre. 

Alsp, we have be comaunded ofttyme, up owre Ilgeaunce, t 5 5 
unnedeful and unlf veful diverse doynges, and alsp to wythdrawe us 
bi the same comaundement frg ihynges n|deful and l|fful, as was 
shewed whan a companye of gode women, thfre men dorst nought, 
travailleden barfote to owre lige Lgrde 16 seche grace of hym for 
trewe men as they supposed ; for thanne wfre such proclamaciouns 10 
made that n§ man ne woman sholde apprpche owre lige Lgrde 
for sechyng of grace, and gvermany othere comaundementz alsp, 
biipre and sithen, bi suggestion and informacion of suche that 
wolde nought her falsnesse had be knowen to owre lige Lprde. 
And, Igrdes, by yowre l§ve, owre 3 yge Lgrdes comaundement to 15 
symple and unkonning men is a grft thyng to ben used sg fami- 
lerllch withouten nede; for they, unwyse to "save it, mowe lyghtly 
thfr ayeins forfait. 

Forthy, graciouse Igrdes, lyke it to yow to take hede in what 
manere and whfre owre lige Lgrdes power hath ben mysused by 20 
the forsaid Nicholus ^ and his upbfrfrs, for sithen thise wrgnges 
bifgresaide han ben used as accidental or comune^ braunches 
outward, it sheweth wel the rote of hem is a ragged subject or 
stok ipw^r 4 , l^t is the forsaid brere or Breinbre, the whiche 
comune ^ wrgnge uses, and many other if it lyke 16 yow, mowe be 25 
shewed and wel knowen bi an indifferent jugp and mair of owre 
citee; the which wyth yowre ryghtful Lgrdeship ygraunted for- 
mggst pryncipal remedye, as Go4des lawe and al rgsoun wole, 
that ng domesman stgnde t6gidre juge and partye, wrgnges sholle 
mgre gpenlich be knowe and trouth dor apfre. And ellls as 50 
amgnge us, we konne nought wyle in what manere without a 
moch gretter disfse, sith the govemaunce of this citee standeth, as 


1 Kiev. 


® co^ with curve over 0. 



//. the dialect of LONDON 


236 

it is bif9r saide, and wele stande, whil vittaillers bl^ suifraunce 
presumen thilke states upon hem ; the which governaunce, of bifpr 
this tyme to moche folke yhidde, sheweth hymself now 9pen, 
whether it hath be a cause or bygynnyng of dyvysion in the citee 
and after in the rewme, or ^ 

Whfrfgre for grettest nede, as to ydw mggst worthy, mggsz 
ryghtful, and wysest Igrdes and Cdnseille to owre lige Lprde the 
Kyng, we biseche mekellch of yowre grace ^ coreccion of alle 
the wrgnges bif^resayde, and that it iyke to yowre Iprdeship to 
be gracious mfnes to owre lygc Lprde the Kyng, that suche 10 
wrgnges be knowen to hym, and that we mowe shewe us and sith ben 
hglden suche trewe to hym as we ben and owe to ben. Alsg we 
biseche unto yowre gracious Igrdeship that if any of us, in special 
or general, be apfched to owre Kge Lgrde or to his worthy Con- 
seille bT comunyng with othere, or apprgchyng to owre Kyng, as 15 
wyth Brembre or his abettours with any wrgnge wytnessebfryr^, 
as that it stode otherwyse amgnges us here than as it is now 
proved it hath ystgnde, or any other wrgnge suggestion by which 
owre llge Lgrde hath ybe unlgfffullich enfourmed, that thanne 
yowre worshipful Igrdship be such that we mowe come in answer 20 
to excuse us; for we knowe wel, as forby moche the mgre partye 
of us and as we hgpe for alle, alle suche wrgnges han ben unwytyng 
to us or elles enterlich ayeins owre wille. 

And, ryghtful Igrdes, for ggn the grettest remedye with othere 
for to ayeinstgnde many of thilke disfses afgresaide amgnges us, 25 
we prayen wyth mekenesse this specialich, that the statut ordeigned 
and made bl parlement, hglden at Westmynstre * in the sexte yfre 
of owre Kyng now regnynge, mowe stgnde in strenglhe and be 
execut as wel here in London as elleswhfre in the rewme, the 
which is this : 3 o 

Item, ordinatum est et statutum, quod nec in civitate Londonie 
nec in aliis civitatibus, burgis, villis, vel portubus marls, per totum 
regnum predictum, aliquis vitallarius officium judicale de cetero 

* gracious, changed to grace. ^ westmyslre. 



CHAUCER^S CANTERBURY TALES 


237 


habeat, exerceat, neque occupet quovis modo, nisi in villis ubi alia 
persona sufiiciens ad hujus statum habendus repperiri non poterit, 
dumtamen idem judex pro tempore quo in officio illo steterit ab 
exercicio vitallarii, sub pena forisfacture victualium suorum sic 
venditorumj penitus cesset et se abstineat, per se et suos omnino 5 
ab eodem, et cet. 


IV. CHAUCER’S CANTERBURY TALES 

The Tale of the Pardoner 

In Flaundres whilom was a compaignye 
Of yonge folk that haunteden folye, 

As riot, hasard, stywes and tavernes, 

Whfreas with harpes, lutes and gyternes 10 

They daunce and pleyen at dees bpthe day and nyght, 

And ften alsp, and drynken §ver hir myght; 

Thurgh which they doon the devel sacrifTse 
Withinne that develes temple in cursed wise 
By superfluytee abhomynable. . 15 

HilHlgthes been sg grfte and sq dampnable 
That it is grisly for to heere hem swfre, 

Oure blissed Lprdes body they totfre; 

Hem thoughte J)at Jewes rente hym noght ynough, 

And fch of hem at otheres synne lough. 20 

And right angn thanne comen tombestfres ^ ^ 

Fftys^ and smale, and yonge frutest|res, ‘ 

Syngfres with harpes, baudes, wafereres, 

Whiche been the verray develes officeres, 

To kyndle and blowe the fyr of lecherye, 25 

That is annexed unto glotonye. 


‘ ffetysj fF for F, as often. 



//. THE DIALEfT OF LONDON 

The hggly writ take 1 to my witnesse, 

That luxurle is in wyn and dronkenesse. 

Lg, how J^at dronken Looth unkyndely 
Lay by hise doghtres twg unwityngly. 

Sg dronke he was he nyste what he wroghte. 
Herodes, whg sg wel the stgnes soghte, 

Whan he of wyn was repleet at hise fggste, 
Right at his owene table he yaf his hggste 
To sl^gn the Baptist Jghn, ful gilteiggs. 

Senek seith ggk^ a good word, douteiggs; 

He seith he kan ng difference fynde 
Bitwix a man that is out of his mynde 
And a man which that is dronkelewe, 

Bot that woodnesse, fallen in a shrewe, 
Persevereth lenger than dooth dronkenesse.. 

Q glotonye, ful of cursednesse; 

0 cause first of cure confusion, 

Q original of oure dampnacion, 

Til Crist hadde boght us with his blood agaynl 
Lg, how deere, shortly for to sayn, 

Aboght was thilke .cursed vileynye; 

Corrupt was al this world for glotonye. 

Adam oure fader, and his wyf alsg, 

Frg Paradys to labour and to wg 
Wgre drjwen for that vice, it is ng drgde; 

For whll ]?at Adam fasted, as I rgde, 

He was in Paradys, and whan fiat he = 

5ft of the fruyt defiended on the tree, 

Angn he was outcast to wg and peyne. 

0 glotonye, on thee wel oghte us pleyne! 

Thise riotoures® thre, of which 1 telle, 

Lgnge frst gr prime rgng of any belle, 

^ eelc, not in MS. j ' Coi^. jMS. eek good Wbrdes. * 


riotoursi 



CHAUCER* S CANTERBURY TALES 


239 


W|re set hem in a taverne to drynke ; 

And as they sat they herde a belle clynke 
Biforn a cors was carled to his grave. 

That QQri of hem gan callen to his knave, 

^ Gg bet/ quod he, ' and axe rfdrly 5 

What cors is this ]?at passelh heer forby, 

And looke f>at thou report his name weel/ 

‘ Sire/ quod this boy, ‘ it nedeth never a dg§l. 

It was me tQQld fr ye cam heer twp houres ; 

He was, pardee, an gld i^we of youres, lo 

And sodeynly he was yslayn ISnyght, 

Fordronke, as he sat on his bench upryght. 

Thfr cam a privee theef men clfpeth d^^th. 

That in this contree al the peple slg§th, 

And with his spfre he smggt his herte atwg 15 

And wente his wey withouten wordes rag. 

He hath a thousand slayn this pestilence. 

And maister, fr ye come in his presence, . 

Me thynketh that it wfre necessarie 

For to be war of swich an adversarXe ; 20 

Beth rfdy for to meete hym everemggre, — 

Thus taughte me my dame, I sey namggre/ 

'By Seinte Marie/ seyde this tavern^'. 

The child seith sooth, for he hath slayn this y§^r, 
Henne gver a mile withinne a gr^gt village, 25 

Bgthe man and womman, child and hjme 'and page; 

1 trowe his habitacion be ihfre. 

To been avysed gr^§t wysdom it wfre, 

Jr that h 5 dide a man a dishonour/ 

' Yf, Goddes armes,’ quod this rlotour, 30 

'Is it swich peril with hym fo^o meele ? 

I shal hym s^ke by w'ey and f^!^by strete, 
mate avow t 5 Goddes digne bgiies ! 

Herkheth, felawes, v /6 thfe been ^nes, 



240 


II, THE DIALECT OF LONDON 


Lat fch of us hglde up his hande til oother 
And fch of us bicomen otheres brother, 

And we wol sl§§n this false traytour d^^th. 

He shal be slayn which ]?at sg manye sl^^th, 

By Goddes dignitee, fr it be nyght/ 5 

Togidres han thise thre hir trouthes plight 
To lyve and dyen fch of hem for oother, 

As though he wfre his owene ybpren^ brother. 

And up they stirte, aP dronken in this rage. 

And forth they gggn towardes that village 10 

Of which the taverner hadde sppke biforn ; 

And many a grisly ggth thanne ban they sworn, 

And Crlstes blessed body they torente, — 

D§gth shal be dggd, if that they may hym hente. 

Whan they han gggn nat fully half a mile, 15 

Bight as they wolde h 5 n troden gver a stile, 

An ggid man and a povre with hem mette. 

This glde man ful mekely hem grette 
And seyde thus, ^ Now, Igrdes, God yow see/ 

The proudeste of thise riotoures® three 20 

Answerde agayn, ‘What, carl, with spry grace 
Why art ow al forwrapped save thy face? 

Why lyvest ow sg Ignge in sg grggt age ? ' 

This glde nian gan looke in his vis%e 
And seyde thus: ‘For I ne kan nat fynde 25 

A man, though j^at I walked into Ynde, 

Neither in citee nor in ng village, 

That wolde chaunge his youthe for myn age; 

And thfrfgre moot I han myn age stille 

As Ignge tj^e as it is Goddes wille. 30 

Ne dggth, alias, ne wol nat han my lyf; 

Thus walke I lyk a restelggs kaityf, 

And on the ground, which is my moodres gate, 

‘ ybom. ^ and. * riotours* 



CHAUCER* S CANTERBURY TALES 24 J 

I knokke -with my staf bQthe gi'ly late. 

And seye, Leeve mooder, l§§t me in ! 

L9, how I vanysshe, flessh and blood and skyn; 

Allas, whan shul my bgnes been at reste ? 

Mooder, with yow wolde I chaunge my cheste 5 

That in my chambre Ignge tyme hath be, 

Yf, for an heyre clowt to wrappe me/' 

But yet to me she wol nat do that grace ; 

For which ful pale and walked is my face. 

But, sires, to yow it is np curteisye 10 

To spoken to an gld man vileynye, 

But he trespasse in word or elles in dfde. 

In hggly writ ye may yourself wel rfde, 

Agayns an ggld man, hgQr_upon bis hggd, 

Ye sholde arise; wherfgre 1 yeve yow xggd/ 15 

Ne dooth unto an ggld man nggn harm now, 
Namggre than J^at 3''e wolde men did to yow 
In age, if that ye sg Ignge abyde ; 

And God be with yow w^hfre ye gg or ryde, — 

1 moote gg thider as I have to gg/ 20 

' Nay, glde cherl, by God thou shalt nat sg/ 

Seyde this oother hasardour angn; 

"Thou partest nat sg lightly, by Seint Jghiil 
Thou spak right now of thilke traytour dg^th. 

That in this contree alle cure freendes slgglh; 25 

Have heer my trouthe, as thou art his espye. 

Telle whgre he is or thou shalt it abye. 

By GLod^nd by the hggly sacrement. 

For sootf|ly thou art ggn of* his assent 
Tg slggn us yonge . folk, thou false theef/ 

" Now, sires,' quod he, ‘ if psit ye be sg leef 
To fynde dgglh, turne up this croked wey. 

For in that grgve I lafte hym, by my fey, 

Under a tree and thfre he wole abyde; 

K 



242 //. THE DIALECT OF LONDOH 

,/ 'V ^ 

Noght for youre bp^st he wole him ngthyng hyde. 

Se ye that ggk ? Right thfre ye shal hym. fyud&j 
God save yow, J?at boghte agayn mankynde, 

And ydw amende/ Thus seyde this glde man; 

And everich of thise riotoures ^ ran 6 

Til he cam to that tree, and thgr they founde 
Of flgryns fyne of gold, ycoyned rounde, 

Wei ny an eighte^ busshels, as hem thoughte. 

Nq lenger thanne after dg§th they soughte, 

But fch of hem sg glad was of that sighte, lo 

For ]?at the flgryns been sg faire and brighte, 

That doun they sette hem by this precious hoord. 

The worste of hem he spak the firste word. 

' Bretheren/ quod he, ‘ taak kepe what I seye,' 

My wit is grggt though f»at I bourde and pleye, 15 
This trfsSr hath fortune unto us yeven 
In myrthe and joliftee oure lyf to lyven, 

And lightly as it comth sg wol we spende. 

Ey, Goddes precious dignitee, whg wende 
Today that we sholde han sg fair a grace? 20 

But myghte this gold be carled frg this place 
Hggm to mjoi hous, or elles unto youres,- — 

For wel ye wggt f>at al this gold is cures, — 

Thanne wfre we in heigh felicitee. 

But trewelj by daye it may nat bee; 25 

Men wolde seyn ]?at we wfre theves strgnge, 

And for oGre owene trfsor doon us hgnge. ' 

This trfsdr moste yeaned be by nyghte 
As wisely and as slyly as it myghte, 

Whfrfgre I rfde fiat cut ^mong us alle 30 

Be drawe, and lat se whfr the cut wol falle; 

And he f>at hath the cut with herte blithe 
Shal renne to the ^ towne, and that ful swithe, 

^ riotours. ^ vitj. ® the, not in MS. 



CHA IfCER •'5 CANTERB UR Y TALES 243 

And brynge ns br^^d and wyn ful prively. 

And twp of us shul kepen subtilly 
This trfsor wel, and if he wol nat tarie, 

Whan it is nyght we wol this trfsor carle 
By g9n assent, whfreas us ihynketh best/ 5 

That ggn of hem the cut broghte in his fest, 

And bad hem drawe and looke whfre it wol falle; 
And it fil on the yongeste of hem alle, 

And forth toward the toun he wente angn. 

And al sg soone as that he was ggn, 10 

That ggn of hem ^ spak thus unto that oother : 

* Thow knowest wel thou art my sworne ® brother ; 

Thy profit wol 1 telle thee angn. 

Thou wggst wel that oure felawe is aggn, 

And heere is gold and that ful grft plentee, 15 

That shal departed been amgng us thre; 

But nathel§§s, if I kan shape it sg 
That it departed wfre amgng us twg, 

Hadde I nat doon a freendes tom to thee?’ 

That oother answerde, ‘ 1 nggt hoii that may be ; 20 

He wggt how that the gold is with us tweye ; 

What shaP we doon, what shal we t 5 hym seye?' 

‘ Shal it be conseil ? ’ seyde the firste shrewe, 

‘And I shal tellen in a wordes fewe 
What we shal doon and bryngen it wel aboute.’ 25 
‘I graunte/ quod that oother, ‘oute of doute, 

That by my trouthe I shal thee nat biwreye/ 

* Now,’ quod the firste, ‘ thou wggst wel we be tweye, 
And twg of us shul stronger be than ggn. 

Looke, whan J^at he is set, thou* right anggn 30 
Arys as though thou woldest with hym pleye, 

And 1 shal ryve him thurgh the sydes tweye 

» of hem, not in E. MS. j all others have the words. * sworn, » wha 1, 

* that j Haxl. MS. thon. 



IL THE DIALECT OF LONDON 


Wliil that th'ou strogelest with hym as in: game, 
And with thy daggere looke thou do the same; 
And thanne shal al this gold departed be, 

My deere freend, bitwixen me and thee. 

Thanne may we bpthe cure lustes all fulfille. 

And pleye at dees right at oure owene wille." 
And thus acorded been thise shrewes tweye^ 

To sl§§n the thridde, as ye han herd me seye. 

This yongeste, which ]?at wente unto the toun, 
Ful ofte in herte he rolleth up and ddun 
The beautee of thise flgryns newe and brighte. 

‘ 0 Fgrd,' quod he, ‘ if sg wfre J^at I myghte 
Have al this trfsor 15 myself allgne, 

Thfr is ng man j^at lyveth under the trgne 
Of God that sholde lyve sg mtirye as V 
And atte laste the feend, oure enemy^ 

Putte in his thought J^at he sholde poyson beye, 
With which he myghte slg§n hise felawes tweye; 
Forwhy the feend fggnd hym in swich lyvynge, 
That he hadde Ifve hym^ to sorwe brynge, 

For this was outrely his fulle entente 
To slg§n hem bgthe and nevere to repente. 

And forth he gggth, ng lenger wolde he tarle, 
Into the toun unt5 a pothecarTe, ’ 

Arid preyde hym ]?at he hym wolde selle 
Som poyson Jpat he myghte hise ratles quelle; 
And thfr was a polcat in his hawe 
That, as he seyde, hise capons hadde yslawe; 

And fayn he wolde wrfke hym, if he myghte. 

On vermyn }?at destroyed hym by nyghte. 

The pothecarTe answerde, ^ ‘ And thou shalt have 
A thyng that, al sg God my soule save, 

In al this world thfr is ng crfature, 

^ hem ; all others hym or him. 



CHAUCER'S CANTERBURY TALES 


That fteh or dronken hath of this confiture 
Noght but the mdntance of a corn of whfte, 
That he ne shal his Iif angn forlfte; 

Yf, sterve he shal, and that in lasse while 
Than thou wolt gggn apaas nat but a mile, 

This poysdn is sg strgng and violent/ 

This cursed man hath in his bond yhent 
This poyson in a box, and sitli he ran 
- Into the nexte strete unto a man, 

And borwed of^ hym large hotels thre. 

And in the twg his poyson poured he ; 

The thridde he kepte clfne for his drynke V 
For al the nyght he shoope hym for to swynke, 
In cariynge of the gold out of that place. 

And whan this rlotour with spry grace 
Hadde filled with wyn hise grfte hotels thre. 

To hise felawes agayn repaireth he. 

What nedeth it to sermone of it mggre? 

For right as® they hadde cast his dggth bifggre, 
Right sg they han hym slayn, and that angn. 

And whan J^at this was doon, thus spak that ggn 
‘Now lat us sitte and drynke and make us merle, 
And afterward we wol his body berle/ 

And with that word it happed hym, par cas, 

To take the hotel thfr the poyson was, 

And drank and yaf his felawe drynke alsg; 

For which angn they storven bgthe twg. 

But certes 1 suppgse that Avycen 
Wrggt nevere in ng canon, ne in ng fen, 

Mg wonder signes of empoisonyng 

Than hadde thise wrecches twg gr hir endyng. 

Thus ended been thise homycldes two, 

* of, from Hail. MS. ^ owene drynke ; all other MSS. drynke. 

^ so as ; all others as. 



24.6 


IL THE DIALECT OF LONDON 


And the false empoysonere alsg. 

Q cursed synne of alle cursednesse! 

Q traytours homycTde, g wikkednesse! 

Q glotonye, luxune, and hasardrye ! 

Thou blasphemour of Crist, with vileynye 5 

And Qihes grfte of usage and of pride, — 

Allas mankynde, — how may it bitIde 

That to thy Crfatour, which ]?at the wroghte 

And with his precious herteblood thee boghte, 

Thou art s§ fals and unkynde, alias! 10 

Now, goode men, God foryeve yow youre trespas, 
And, ware ‘yow bg the synne of avarice. 



NOTES'" 


PART I 


THE MIDLAND DIALECT 

This part contains specimens of the several varieties of this dialectal 
division, but especially of East Midland, as that upon which later English is 
especially based. Only two selections represent West Midland, the ‘ Prose 
Psalter* (p. lOo) and the * Instructions to Parish Priests* (p. 119), as that dialect 
in its purity does not materially differ from East Midland. More iniportant is 
the distinction of Early East Midland from that of the thirteenth and fourteenth 
centuries, which may be regarded as normal Middle English in this dialect. 
Early East Midland, represented by the first two selections, shows the language 
in a transition state. For example, OE. a still remains 5 , the characteristic 
lengthening of OE, <f, c in open syllables had not taken place, and other less 
significant changes already mentioned in the Grammatical Introduction. 


A. EARLY EAST MIDLAND 

I THE PfeTERBOROXJGH CHRONICLE 

The last part of the ‘Chronicle,* from 1080 to its close, occurs only in I^ud 
MS. 636 of the Bodleian Library, Oxford. The whole has been frequently 
edited, as by Tho^e and Earle, before the^ latteris edition was re-edited by 
Plummer, ‘Two of the Saxon Chronicles Parallel* (i892‘-9). Selections are 
found in Morris Specimens,’ 1 , 9) and Zupitza (‘ tlbungsbuch/p. 57^ Schipper 75). 


^ These Notes are intended to give, in methodical manner, some account of 
MSS. and editions ; time and place of composition, as well as author if knowjn ; 
character of the work, relation of the extract to the whole, and metrical 
relations, if poetry; source of derived material, when known; bibliography 
of more important monographs; explanations of words^ phrases, alluslous,! 
and other difficulties. General works of reference are not mentioned in con- 
nexion with each selection, for teachers will naturally refer to Ten 
‘ History of English Literature,* Moriley*s ‘ English Writers,’ BrandPs ‘ MitteL- 
englische Litteratur ’ in Paul’s ‘ Grundriss der Germanischen Philologiq,* and 
Kortmg'S'‘Grundriss der Geschichte der Englischen Litteratur.’ Oross-orraerQBtcses 
to the texjts are by page and line, the Notes to each page of text being anranged 
in a su^le paragraph. 



THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


248 

Written at Peterborough, Northampton, the part chosen includes all that is 
written in the hand of the last continuator, who gives a summary of Stephen s 
reign immediately after his death in 1154. The selection therefore represents 
Northeast Midland (NEMl.) of the middle of the twelfth c^tury. See 
Behm, ‘ The Language of the Latter Part of the Peterborough Chronicle ( i S84) ; 
H. Meyer, ‘ Zur Sprache der jiingeren Teile der Chronik von Peterborough 

^^¥he*‘ Chronicle,’ as the most important source for the history of the period, 
cannot be too highly regarded. Especially valuable is this contemporaneous 
account of Stephen’s reign, since it is more detailed than most of the other 
entries and more vividly narrated. On the other hand the order of events is 
not chronological, as shown by Plummer (as above), II, 307. 

As to language, the orthography of this selection is less regular than most 
others of the book. It shows the unstable condition of the written form when 
English was less commonly used in literature, as well as some orthographic 
influences of older works. Special peculiarities of orthography are H for 
OM. a, ea, rarely eo\ e for CM. e (a% especially in unstressed syllables; sa 
for OM. e, as in gear\ eo for OM. e, eo, rarely Sa; eo {^0) for OM. rarelv 
Among consonants the most important peculiarities are ch for the OE. medial 
spirant^ in a few words; gii) for the OE. initial palatal spirant^; / initially 
for OE.^ (ff) in pronominal words when immediately following a final d ox t\ 
w iox OE. hw^ as in %mrs(B. The vocabulary shows a larger French element 
than the selections immediately following, partly owing to the number of terms 
connected with government and the church. The inflexions, which have 
been thought quite irregular, will fall into fairly definite schemes. Noun 
plurals in es{s) prevail, though a few OE. neuters with long stems still remain 
without ending. Adjectives have almost wholly lost oblique case forms. 
Verbs show somewhat more irregularities, but are fast tending to the simplicity 
of normal Middle English. The syntax of The period is also comparatively 
simple. On the other hand, the inverted order of subject and predicate is 
common, and the construction according to sense with collective nouns 
occasional. The title king ( 1 . i) is still an appositive and follows the personal 
name, or the personal name is in apposition with king ( 1 . 15). The most 
striking single construction, from the standpoint of Modern English, is the 
double genitive, as Stephnes Kmges U, 28), klnges sum Henries ( 5 , 12) ; 
yet these are quite in accord with OE. usage and the appositive noted above. 
Subjunctive foims of the verb are naturally much more frequent than in English 
of to-day. 

Page 1 , 1 . 1 . Henri King. Henry I, who had come to the throne in 1 100. 
Henrf abbot. Henry of Poitou, abbot of St. Jean d’Angely, from which 
he was expelled in 1131, to the great rejoicing of the monks who had been 
under him. He was related to Henry I and the Count of Poitiers, and had 
been a monk at Cluny or Clugni (1, 3) in Burgundy, This monastery was at 
the height of its prosperity in the twelfth century, some 2,000 religious houses 
throughout Europe acknowledging allegiance to it. 2 . Burch. That is. 
Borough of St. Peter, Peterborough, a name which supplanted the earlier 
Medeshamstede. A Benedictine abbey of St. Peter had been founded in 655 by 
Oswy, King of Northumbria, and Peada, the first Christian King of Mercia* 
Plundered by the Danes in 870, it was re-established in 966 by Athelwold, 
Bishop of Winchester, who also changed its name. 3 . te. For after 



THE PETERBOROUGH CHRONICLE 249 

a word ending in i or d, 5 . Bisoop of Seresberi. Roger of Salisbury and 
Alexander of Lincoln, his nephew. 0. pe. Note the retention of the OE. 
relative particle in early Middle English, though soon to be replaced by pat. 
"he. The abbot Henry. As in Old English, pronouns are often lacking in 
explicit reference. ^0 he he , his of the next line refer to the same Henry. 

10. iaf. This form, among others, shows how completely OE. palatal 
spirant^ had assumed the quality of MnE._y. Cf. idfen ( 2 , 26), ieden ( 3 , 28). 

11. Sanct Neod. St. Neot’s in Huntingdonshire. The MS. abbreviation for 

St. gives us no hint as to whether the OE. noun form, satiety or sant (cf. Orm's 
sannt) was actually used. It is doubtless too early for the OF. form saint 
with a diphthong. 12. Sanct PStres messedai. June 29, the feast of 
St. Peter and St. Paul in commemoration of their martyrdom ; really the date 
of reburial of their supposed remains in 358 A. D. 14 . pa pestrede. Henry I 

left England, never to return, on Aug. i (Lammas), 1133. The eclipse 
occurred on the next day, but Henry did not die until Dec. i, 1135 ( 1 , i8). 
Perhaps the traditional bringing together of these two dates accounts for the 
wrong dating of Henry’s departure from England. 15 . ware. * Might be ’ ; 
subjunctive preterit singular. For other forms with a in pret. pi. cf. namen 
( 2 , i), drdpen ( 3 , iS), wdren ( 3 , 29), forbdren ( 3 , 31), stdli (6, 8). 
16 , sterres abuten. The copulative verb omitted as often. 18 . tJat oper 
dsei. * The second, or next day,’ eper being used with ordinal force as in Old 
English. St, Andrew’s day is Nov. 30, and Henry died on Dec. i. Andreas, 
a borrowed word ending in takes no ending in the genitive. 19 . pa wes 
trfson. The MS. reading was long a puzzle, and various emendations were 
suggested before the present editor pointed out the true reading in ^ Mod. Lang. 
Notes,’ VIT, 254. This was adopted by Plummer in a note to this passage 
(II, 307). Incidentally this is the first example so far discovered of the French 
word treason in English. ' ' 

Page 2 , 1 . 2. Bf dinge. Henry I had founded an abbey at this place, no 
doubt the reason for his burial there. 10. midewintr© dsei. That is 
Christmans day, but authorities give the date variously, as Dec. 22, 24, 25, 26, 
the latter being St. Stephen’s day. The name midwinter day is Teutonic, 
and antedates the Christianization of Britain. With the Conquest, Christmas 
{Crtstes masse) came to be used. 12. Baldwin d© Bedvers. The 
rebellion really belongs to the year 1136, as also the compact with David, 
King of Scotland. This Baldwin, first Earl Redvers (Rivers), died in 1155. 
18 . for ... to Normandu The journey was in March, the return ( 1 , 23) in 
December. 20. get. Plummer says past participle of a weak verb geten 
‘ get,’ but this is not likely on several acepunts. The word is the adverb ^et 
(OM. ^etj WS. £fet) * yet,’ as given in the glossary to Morris’s * Specimens,’ I ; 
cf. for the same word 16 , 3 ; 29 , 5. The treasure which Stephen yet had, and 
for which they received him so gladly, was about ;^Ioo,ooo. ^ 23 . gadering 
set Oxeneford. This was in June, 1139, Bishop Roger was justiciar, or chief 
justice, and regent in the king’s absence. Roger, the chancellor, was nephew 
only by courtesy. 26 . his© neves. The plural form of the pronoun shows 
that' the OE. genitive his, from he, had developed a possessive pronoun, with 
inflexion, as min and pin had done in the older period. 

Page 3 , 1 . 3 # b© nihtes , . . be deeies. The force of the OE. adverbial 
genitive is apparently not felt, and The adverbial relation is more clearly 
indicated by a prepositional phrase; carlmen ahd winameh. ‘ Men and 



THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


250 

’women.’ The word maft was general in its meaning, and probably 
account the more distinctive carlmen was employed. 6. me henged. ^ They 
hanged (them) np by the feet,’ &c. The indefinite me, an old singular, implies 
a plural, as indicated by the verbs hhtgen (1. 7) and wry then (!• 8)* 
cethus. The context sufficiently explains the meaning of this term. ^Ihe 
first part is apparently Lat. €ruciatMS\ for the quantity of H cf. criic ya. 
Pogatscher, ^Die griechischen, lateinischen tmd romanischen Lehnworte im 
Altenglischen.’ 14. lof and grin. This must be regarded as still a crux. 
The MS. reads UfigrX, which suggested to Thorpe Ifp and grim, * loathsome 
and grim,’ as the names of the instruments, being for 0£. The use of the 
two names then accounted for the plural verb. On the other hand, the use of 
two adjectives in this way for an instrument would presuppose a singular verb, 
besides being unsatisfactory in other ways. rachenteges. Really a com- 
pound of OE. ramtie 'chain' and OM. teKi)> WS. tSah{g^ 'fetter, but the 
relation of the parts of the compound had probab^ been lost^ To 

be carefully distinguished from d}er, OE. dj>er, Q}er, OE. dghwatSer, soon 
became ME. gr, or, and MnE. or. 16. beBron.*^ This form for the infinitive 
heren is paralleled by ceten = eien (5, 14I, beg^ien ~ hegeten (7 , 2). )\'hile not 
marhed long here they probably represent sporadic cases of lengthening of e in 
an open syllable, a change which was not regularly carried out until the 
thirteenth century. 21. 6at lastede. This proves conclusively that the 
account was not written until the close of Stephen’s reign. Cf. aUo the reference 
to Martin’s abbacy (4, 10 f.) lasting to Jan., 1155. 23. eevre nm wile. 

' Ever from time to time,' OE. dfre ymhe hixnle. The form um is Old Nors^ 
cognate with OE.ymde\ cf. umsiund in 'Cursor Mundi.’ 24. tenserie. 
First explained by Mr. Round and Mr. Toynbee in the 'Academy,’ July li, 
1S92. It is a NF. form based on LL. Unsarium, 'a generic term for certain 
irregular taxations’; the latter is' fiom tensare, ^to protect, exact tribute for 
protection.’ 31. gwer sithon. 'Everywhere thereafter, or afterwards.’ 
The first word is OM. dhwer, WS. dhwcer, 

Pag© 4, 1. S. tunsoipe flugen. Notice the construction according tb 
sense ; tunscipe is a grammatical singular, a logical plural, and the verb agrees 
with the latter, as often. 6. warsse, perhaps ''Sle. OM. hw^ {hwarT), 
SvS, hwdr, and see from older swS. 8. Crist slep. In interpretingChrist’s 
sleeping in the ship during the storm (Matt. viii» 24), the ME, 'Metrical 
Homilies ’ (ed. by Small, p. 135) explain that the ship is the church : 

‘ And Crist 3>arin gasteli slepes, 

Quen he Jjoles god men and lele 
Wit wic(ce) men and fals(e) dele, 

|)at betes >aim wit dede and word 
Ais se bare betes on schipbord.* 

11. famd. ' Provided for,* Still used in dialectal Eiaglish in whi<^ a coimtry 
labourer is engaged for ' so much and found,’ that is, so much pay in addition to 
board and lodging. 14. Iset it refen. ^Let roof it, caused it to be roofed.* 
17, for to Borne. This event, though placed under the year 1137, icould not 
have taken place imtU 1145, since Eugenius did not become pope until that 
year. Cf, note to 3, 21. 18. privilegie^. The OP', form is privilege, 

so that ie is here not long, unless it shows influence of OF. weyrds in it. 
20-21. circewican . . . horderwycan. That OE. wJee had acquired final 
« in the nominative is clear from Onn’s use, so that these examples can hardly 



THE PETERBOROUGH CHRONICLE 


251 


be assumed to be weak datives. 22. Bogingham ]?e castel. ' The castle 
of Rockingham.’ 24 . solidi. The MS. abbreviation is expanded as a Lat, 
plural, since the word was hardly English. The words aelc gier, inserted above 
the line by the writer of the MS., -w’ere bracketed by Morris as if not in the 
MS. (‘Specimens,’ I), and this led to the proposal of so/ida/as, ‘ a measure of 
land,’ as the true reading (‘ Mod. Lang. Notes,’ VII, 134). The correct reading 
of the MS. shows that a sum of money is intended. 25 . winiSrd. Plummer 
notes, on Bede (‘ Hist. Eccles.,’ Bk. I, ch. i), that vine-growing was formerly 
common in England, especially in some of the monasteries. 28 . Stephnes 
Kinges. Each word is made genitive in form as in Old English. The MnE. 
group genitive has not yet developed; cf. J>i hinges stme Henries ( 5 , 
hinges dohter Henries ( 5 , 30). 29 . On Ms time. The death of William 

of Norwich, afterwaids St. William, is placed in 1144 and 1146 by different 
chroniclers, Plummer says, ‘ The charge against the Jews of using the blood 
of murdered gentiles, especially Christian children, for ritual purposes is as old 
as the time of Josephus’; see his ‘ Contra Apionem,’ II, 8. Cf. the similar 
story in Chaucer’s ‘ Prioress’s Tale.’ 31 . lang Pridsei. The term occurs 
occasionally in QE. langa Frigadag (Frigeda^^ and is common in Old Norse 
as la 7 tgifrjddagr. 

Page 5 , 1 . 2. and t§ munekes. *And those monks.’ Editors have 
seemed to think to an unusual form, but it is a natural development of OE.^^f 
after a final d\ cf. 5 , 8. 8. sevest, MS. mvez. The MS. z is an OF. 

spelling, usually of fr, but here of sU 9 . set te Standard. The battle was 
fought at Northallerton, Yorkshire. Its name comes from the fact that banners 
of St. Cuthbert of Durham, St. Peter of York, St. John of Beverley, and 
St. Wilfred of Ripon were fixed upon a pole in a four-wheeled cart and placed 
in the centre of the English army. 12. wart it war. ‘ Became aware of 
it.* 13 . pestrede ]je sunne. This date of March 20, 1140 (1. 13), is shown 
to be correct by the table of eclipses. 16 . Willelm^ .fflrcebiscop. The 
Willelm Curbuil mentioned at 2 , 9. 24 . Bodbert Borl of Gloucestre. 

Robert was a natural son of Henry I and hence half-brother of Matilda, whose 
claims to the throne he vigorously espoused. 26 . lieore laverd. That is, 
King Stephen; so him of 1 . 27. Stephen was taken prisoner Feb. 2, 1141. 
30 . kinges dohter Henries. This was iEthelic (Adelaide) of earlier 
references, the daughter of Henry I, who was given in marriage to Henry V 
of Germany. On her coronation, July 25, mo, her name was changed to 
Matilda. At her husband’s death, 1126, she returned to England, and her 
father caused homage to be done to her as his successor. This was reason 
enough for her enmity toward Stephen. Soon after she was given in marriage 
to Geoffrey of Anjou. She reached England in 1139 and was chosen Lady 
(the name Queen was not used for her) in 1141. In June of the same year 
she lied from London. 32 . scS. This is especially noteworthy as the 
earliest use of the form which became MnE. she^ 

Page 6, 1 . 1. biscop of Wincestre. Henry of Blois, formerly abbot of 
Glastonbury. 8. stali M. Preterit plural with loss of final n when 

immediately followed by a subject pronoun. In Old English this occurred 
only in the case of the first and second persons, but it seems to have been 
extended to the third person in ME. times. Cf. 25 , 1 1, 14. 14 . swS diden. 

The exchs^e was made in 1141. The next year came the reconciliation with 



252 


THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


Randolph, earl of Chester. 26 . brohten hire intS Oxenford. Pjs was 
in March or May, 1141, the chronicler doubling back in his narrative to tell of 
the divided state of England. Matilda %vas besieged in Oxford during 
October or November, 1142, and she escaped to Wallingford m Dec^ber. 
She did not go over sea ( 1 . 30) until the early part of 1147 - 27 . J)a herde 

iat seegen. ‘Then heard he that saying ^ is segen {sagetl), 

‘saying, assertion/ and not an infinitive (OE. as usually interpmer. 

Confusion has resulted from the form of the infinitive in 4 , 28. 30 . hi of 

Normandi. This happened between 1141 and 1144. 


Page 7 , 1 . 1 . ferdo Eustace. Stephen’s son Eustace married Constance, 
sister of the French king, in February, 1140. He died (1. 8) in August, 1153, 
his mother May 3, 1152. 2. to wife. The OE. dative remains longest in 

such expressions as this, though finally displaced by the invariable nom. 
dat. acc. form; cf. id wive (24, 19), id wlf (40, 13). 9. Ms sune Henri. 

Henry succeeded to the dukedom of Anjou on the death of his father, Sept, 7, 
1151. In March, 1152, Eleanor was divorced fiorii Louis VII, and she 
married Henry ( 1 . ii) in May of the same year. toe to p3 rice. 
‘Succeeded to the kingdom.’ The OE. idiom id, and>/? had now 

been displaced by iahen^ from ON. taka, 12. pa ferd© he. This was in 
January, 1153, and in November peace was made ( 1 . 15). 16 . ware. 

Pret. subj., ‘ should be.’ Cf. 1 . 15. 27 . past minster. Stephen and his 

queen had founded the religious house at Feversham, Kent, and the minster 
had been completed in 1148. 

Page 8, 1 . 1. innen dseis. Some number is peihaps omitted before dmis. 
cusen. The OE. curan had already given way to a form with r, by analogy of 
the present and preterit singular. So with the past participle cosan *= cosen 
in 1 . 4. 9. Ramesseie . . . Tornei© . . . SpaUding. These are Ramsey 

(Huntingdonshire), Thorney (Cambiidgeshire), and Spalding (Lincolnshire), 
all in the neighbourhood of Peterborough. The other places named cannot be 
made out with certainty. • ' 


n. THE DEDICATION TO THE ‘ ORMULUM ’ 

The ‘ Ormulum ’ is preserved in Junius MS. i of the Bodleian Library, not 
improbably the MS. of Orm himself. It has been edited by White (1852), and 
this revised by Holt (1878), though a more scholarly edition is still much needed. 
Selections occur in Morris (‘Specimens,’ I, 39), Matzner (‘ Sprachproben,’ 
Ij 3 )j Sweet (‘First Middle English Primer,’ 43), Zupitza (‘ Ubungsbuch,' 7, 
Schipper, 99). An indispensable collation of the MS. was printed by Kolbing 
in ‘ Englische Studien,’ I, i. Of the author nothing is known beyond what is 
given in this Introduction (see various notes). The ‘ Ormulum’ was composed 
in the neighbourhood of Lincoln about 1200, and the language therefore 
represents the Northeast Midland of that period. Orm’s language, in relation 
to orthography and vowel quantity, is discussed in the Grammatical Intro- 
duction (§ 71, note). Besides may be noted Callenberg, ‘Layamon u. Orm 
nach ihren Lautverhaltnissen verglichen* (1876); Sachse, ‘ Das unorganische 
q im Ormulum’ (iS8i) ; Brate, ‘ Nordisehe Lehnwdrter im Ormulum* in PauL 
li. Braune’s ‘ Beitrage,’ X, i J Klnge, EDgUschc -Studien,’ XXII, 1 79. 



THE DEDICATION TO THE ORMULUM 


253 


The name of the work is given by the author (Preface, 1 . i) : J?iss hoc is 
nemmnedd Orrmulum, forr|)i Jjatt Orrm itt wrohhte, Ormulum is clearly a 
diminutive, after the Latin, of the author’s name. The book consists of an 
introduction, called dedication and preface, paraphrases intended to cover the 
gospels read in the church during the year, and homilies upon them. Of 
these paraphrases and homilies only about one-eighth were completed, or at 
least remain in MS., but these extend to nearly ten thousand long lines. The 
work has little literary value, as it is prosaic in the extreme, but is especially 
valuable for the light which it throws on the language of the time. The 
metrical form is that of the long line of fifteen syllables with caesura after the 
eighth, but without rime or regular alliteration. The metrical flow is 
iambic, and the metre is clearly based on the Latin septenarius. With the 
addition of rime this metre became the MnE. quatrain of alternate eight and 
seven syllables, the long line being broken at the caesural pause. On the other 
hand, Menthel, following Trautmann, tries to connect Orm’s verse with that 
of Otfried, * Znr Geschichte des Otfriedischen Verses in England ’ (Anglia, VIII, 
Anzeiger, 49). The sources of the ‘Ormulum* have been shown to be prin- 
cipally Bede and Gregory the Great; cf. Sarrazin, ‘tJber die Quellen des 
Ormulum’ (‘ Englische Studien,’ VI, l). 

As to language, the peculiarities of Orm’s orthography have been discussed 
in the Grammatical Introduction. Here may be added Orm’s S for OE- 
sometimes OM. the exact limits of the use not having been accurately 
made out; the use of or w for the second element of a true diphthong (cf, 
)>e^I * they,’ Awivstin for OF. Ausim), as well as for OE. or w ; / for OE. 
medial/— 2/ ; ^in^oi/'good’ distinguished from ^ in strmige^ though no example 
occurs in our selection ; shissK) for OE. scy beside for ON., OP. sk i^sc—sE). 
The poetical form naturally gives special assistance in regard to language, as 
in accent of words, and elision of final ^ (occasionally other vowels) before 
a vowel or weak h. Orm’s vocabulary is characterized by a large Norse 
element and a smaller OF. element than in the ‘ Chronicle.’ ^ His inflexions 
are exceedingly simple, and the syntax, at least of this selection, requires no 
special explanation other than an occasional note. 

Page 8, 1 . 13 . brojjorr min. Probably not blood -relationship in the 
restricted sense, but rather that in which Philemon is desired to receive 
Onesimus as ‘ a brother in the flesh,’ Phileni. 16. Cf. Henrici, ‘ Otfrid s 
Mutter und Orm’s Binder’ (‘ Zeitschrift f. Deutsches Alterthum,’ XXII, 331), 
14 . Annd. The MS. sign (l) is thus expanded in accordance with occa- 
sional forms of the word in the * Ormulum.’ Of course there can be no question 
of the shortness of the vowel in this unstressed word. 15 , 1 Godess bus. 
In the religious house of which Ihey were both canons, it would seem from 
I. 17. 16 . Witt. The dual forms of the pronouns are rare except in the 

earliest period. 17 . XTnnderr. While the rhythm of Orm’s lines is pre- 
vailingly iambic, a trochee instead of an iamb often occurs at the beginning 
of the line, or immediately after the caesura; cf. AffUrr ( 1 . 20), 

(9, 13), and following the caesura affterr (1. 13), goddspdhss (Lip)* 
who suppose that these words are given iambic stress assume that Orm did 
violence to the natural accent of words, instead of following a frequent custom 
in all English iambic rhythm. swa summ Samit AwwsHn sette. 
That is, St. Augustine, the great patron of the monastic life. The more 
.explicit rale actually followed by Augustine monks was that of St. Benedict 



tUE MIDLAND DIALECT 


254 

(Benet), based on the brief directions in the writings of St. Augustine. 
19. Tiinrig liaaTi. The substantive English seems already to have become 
established, since it never occurs with final e in Orm, while the adjective 
appears with or without as in 1. 22, where EnngHssh ffcrlc is practically 
a compound, and at 10, 20. hall5h6 lare. The adjective is in the weals 
fiatm after a genitive, as shown by Sachse (mentioned above). 20. jDrmhtin, 
AccordiBg. to Orm’s manner of indicating vowel quantity the t of the last 
syllable is long-, though the word represents OE. drihien\ cf. Morsbach, § 67, 
Anm. 4. 21. 4>oliliteaat tatt. The rule that initial/ of pronominal words 

becomes / after toi d\% followed absolutely in Orm, as shown by Blackburn 

Amer. Journal of Philology/ Ilf, 46). See also note on 9, ii. 22. lufo 
off. Elision of weak e occurs regularly before a vowel or weak h ; see Oram. 
In trod. 26. unnc birr]?. ^ It becomes (behooves) us both.’ 

Page 9 , 1 1 . pa. goddspelless meb. alle. The Latin texts given by Orm 
after the ‘Dedication* show that he followed, in general, some gospel 
harmony of his time. 2. sinndeim. This form is less common in Mid- 
land, except in the early period. It is displaced by are(n), found in the 
Anglian district in OE. times; cf. ‘Vespasian Psalter’ earon, Nth. aron (un), 
and Sievers, ‘Angelsachsische Grammatik,’ § 427- n§de. This 

might almost be written as a compound. Such examples scarcely prove 
retention of the OE. feminine genitive, with gender signification, at least for 
Midland and Northern. 7- amang. Orm’s orthography gives no clue to 
the length of the first a, but the constant appearance ota instead of<7 ( = ^ 
in later texts seems conclusive proof of shortness; cf. amgngt 18, 10.. 

10. t*tuitiderrstajniid©n,it. Occasional elision of other vowels than weak 

occurs in the ‘ Ormulum cf. ket^ 10, 4. 11. pess te bettre. The change 

of initial / to / in pronominal words occurs after s in only a few such ex- 
pressions as the above. p85iui. This form, with the nominative/^;?^ (I.26) 
and genitive ( 1. 4), shows that Orm’s dialect bad already begun to use 
the ON. forms of the pronoun, a change which had not been fully accomplished 
in Southeast Midland in Chaucer’s time. 16. ferrs, OE. from 

Lat. versus f soon to give way to OF. ves’s^ 17. wel , . . well. Both fornis 
occur in Orm, Holthan^en has shown Anglia Beiblatt/XIlI, 16) that wills 
the prevailing form in both stressed and unstressed positions, ana is used in 
independent positions, while well is employed when modifying an adjective or 
adverb. There are some exceptions even to this rule. annd all forrpi. 

‘ And therefore {all ferr}l) I was compelled, full often of necessity, to put 
{dSn) my word among the words of the gospel, to fill my verse.’ dlede is an 
adverb, and shollde has the old sense of ‘ was obliged, had to.’ 19. wikenn. 
This OE, has acquired final n in the nominative singular, contrary to 

the usual rule. Cf. the compounds circewlkan^ horderwycan (4, 21-22). 
26. lelteim. ‘Think, judge,* less common meanings of OM. litan^ "WS. 
Idian, but common in Old Norse* 

Page 10, 1. 6. fele wordess. Note the early use of feU (OE. sb. feolet) 
as an adjective, and cf. German vieL 24. att Godd. ‘From God’; cf. 
‘at the hands of,* a relic of this use in modem English. 80. jiff pejj all 
forrwerrpenn itt. The same thought is to be found in .^Ifric’s ‘ Homilies,’ 

11, 528 : Gif we for synfullum mannum gebiddatJ, and hi Saere ?iingunge un- 
wurtfe synd, ne beo We swatSeah bedielede edleanes Jjses godan willan, tJeah 
})e we Sam forscyldegodan getJJngian ne magon, * If we pray for sinful men 



TMJ^ ‘BESTIARY* 


^55 

and ate imwartKy q£ tke intercession, yet we shall not be deprived of 
t&e reward' of good intention, thonglr wer may? asafe be. able to mediate for 
the guilty.’ 

Page 11, 1. 7. all mannkinne node. Mannkinne is an OE. genitive 
plural, which has not yet taken the invariable plural ending es^ perhaps 
because it was felt to be part of a componiid. The form mannkinness is also 
found in such expressions, 21. flumm Jorrdan. Owing to the regular 
appearance of the two words in this order Kluge assumes that both are of 
OF. origin. While I have followed Kluge here, the whole subject of Scripture 
proper names in English needs fuller investigation. In Middle English the 
lack of certainty with regard to Latin or French origin of such names par- 
ticularly affects names beginning with MnE.y, since they are written with 
I or J indiscriminately. 26. dmpf. The doubling of ^3 would indicate 
shortness of the vowel, but the latter is marked long in accordance with the 
more common writing cf. 1. 8. wi]j])utenii WTihbte. ‘Without 

merit or desert,* so ‘ undeservedly. ' 

Pagd 12, 1. e. wiss to fulld sop. ^ Certainly, in full truth.* JViss is 
OE. iewiss^ strengthened by to fulU so}, 18. sefiPnde. ^ The OE. seofete 
has already been displaced by the analogical form on the basis of the cardinal, 
as in MnE. se^vetith. 25. patt h.© sahh. Cf. Rev. v- i f. 32. naness 
kiness sbaffte. Note the genitive inflexion of both adjective and noun. 
The uninflected adjective is more common, but the inflected form remains in 
certain expressions. 

Page IS, 1. 4 . all all swa se. The doubling of all for emphasis is not 
uncommon in Orm. 26. Orrmin. Matzner regarded the name as formed 
o» the l>atin model, but Zupitza (* Guy of Warwick,* note to 1. 9529 , EETS., 
Extra Series, ^ 5 - 3 6 ) makes it a diminutive of Orm on the French model ; cf, 
Awiostlitf 8 , 17 . Otm*s name is believed to be from ON. ormr, cognate with 
OE. ioyfm ' worm, serpent.’ 30. allre leresst. The MS. gives clear evi- 
dence, as ht some other eases, of elision. 


B. MIDLAND OF THE THIRTEENTH AND 
FOURTEENTH CENTURIES 
t THE * BESTIARY’ 

The ' Bestiary,’ from which these selections are taken, is found in Arundel 



CAn Old Engli ^ r - 

proben ’ I, 55), and a selection by Morris Q Specimens, 1 , 133)* The language 
of the ‘Bestiary* is that of the Southeast Midland (SEMI.) during the first half 
of the thirteenth century. ^ , * , . ^ .1 

The poem consists of more or less fanciful descriptions of thirteen animals, 
with allegorical interpretations of their supposed characteristics. The first 



THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


256 

•twelve sections are based on the Latin ‘ Physiologns ’ of Theobaldus, an Ital^ 
monk of the eleventh c^tury, the thirteenth upon. Alexander Neckam s * De 
Naturis Rerum.* The * Physiologus ’ of Theobaldus is printed by Moms as an 
appendix to 'An Old English Miscellany.’ Fragments of an older 'Physio- 
logus ’ occur in Old English poetry. The metrical forms of the ' Bestiary are 
various. The first and third selections are in long unrimed lines with some 
attempt at alliteration. The second, with exception of the first line, breaks up 
into rimed couplets of four (occasionally three) stresses. The ' Sigmfication 
of the Eagle, however, show.s long rimed lines with the first half-lines frequently 
riming together also. If the latter feature were perfectly carried out we should 
have a four-line stanza riming abab. The metre of the fourth is similar to the 
first part of the second, but all show many irregularities in detail.^ These 
metrical forms are especially interesting in relation not only to the alliterative 
line of Old English, but also to the rimed couplet of four stresses which was 
'soon to be so common in England, 

As to language, all Old English diphthongs have become simple vowels, and 
the new diphthongs are appearing ; OE. ii is no longer used; the change of OE. 
a top, and the lengthening of vowels in open syllables, have taken place; in 
other words typical East Midland is before us. Special peculiarities in ortho- 
graphy are OF. c = s initially ; ^iox gm god , ' good,’ and for ^ in ligt ^ ' light,* 
or ^ ^ in ' ye ’ ; s {ss) d always for OE. ^ or/. 

Page 14, 1. 1. leun stant. Both iMn and biun occur in Middle English 
as in Old French, the latter finally prevailing. Conti actions like stant -standep 
are more common in SEMI, than in NEMl., and still more common in Southern, 
liillel No doubt dative of hil (l.“i4), though possibly from the OE. kylle f., 
beside hyll m. and. * If * ; it translates Lat. si of Theobaldus, introducing 
the subjunctive hero. The Latin also shows that the first half-line is a separate 
sentence, not immediately connected with the next as usually punctuated. 4. 
fetsteppes. Note that the plural in MnE. compounds of mutation nouns, 
except man, loses all trace of mutation. 5. dun. The addition of this word, 
though not corresponding exactly to anything in the Latin, seems justified by 
the context and especially by 1. 18. It was first added by Morris. 6. he. 
Refers to ' hunter,* implied in kunUn (1. i). 9. H5. With this contracted 

form compare lleti in 1. iz. 16. Hu. Both hH and ‘wn are found in the selec- 
tions, and represent OE. hu and hwu respectively, the latter commonly becom- 
ing wu in Sth. English. For convenience they have been legularized throughout 
the selection on the basis of the first form, the more common Midland' variety. 
17. divel. This form shows conclusively that shortening of OE. deofol had 
taken place, since only divcl could have become diveL The latter is still 
common in dialectal English. 18. denned© him. * Made a resting-place 
for himself.* The Latin is : 

'Viscera Marie tibi, Christe, fuisse cubile,* 
and OE. denn is glossed ' cubile.’ 19. defte. ' Mild, gentle, meek.’ OE. 
gedceft, whence MnE. daft by a change of meaning similar to that of ' simple,* 

' innocent.’ MnE. deft, from the same root if not the same word, has acquired 
the sense ' skilful * through * easy,* a natural development from ‘ mild.* 20. 
to manne frame. ' To the profit of men.* Manne is a relic of the OE. gen, 
pi. manna. Such a genitive plural is preserved only in certain expressions, 
and probably the folk-mind regarded combinations like manne frame as essen^ 
tially compounds, 



THE ^BESTIARY 


257 


Page 15, 1. 3. dfde dflje, with d from voiced /. Bed for death still 
exists m English dialects. Cf. 122,6 for the word in rime. 5. hird.e. The 
strict Ml. form is herde, MnE. (shep)herd. Hlvde doubtless comes from WS. 
Jttei'de ; cf. stlden — shilden (1. 6) for MI. sheldeny MnE. shield, 15-16. 
dimme . . . him. The rimes of the ‘ Bestiary ’ are sufficiently irregular so that 
the extra syllable of the first line does not seem remarkable. As dimme ispl- 
we assume the word, was disyllabic, though compare 20, 26. 21. skies 

sexe and sevene. Referring to the traditional view of the heavens, based on 
the Ptolemaic system. 25. Be sunne swrUe'S. The Lat. reads Ttmc sibi 
sol ambas acce7tdit Jervidns alas. 

Page 16, 1. 2. Ne were. * If his beak were not * ; weren't, subj, 15 
kirke. A distinctly Nth. or NEMl. form, perhaps used for rime. 16. 9^. 
Distinguish from ar, ‘ or ^ ; this is ON. dr cognate with OE. eer^ ' ere,' 21. to 
G-ode ward. This is a not uncommon order of words in OE., though tmeard 
(toward) also occurs. Cf. to tSS water ward (17, 9). letelJ. ‘ Thinks’ ; 
this makes a perfect rime with beietS and gives a good meaning. The MS^ 
reading lereB « lired is an imperfect rime in both vowel and consonant. 22. 
te sunne sikerlike. The allegory here may be illustrated by an OE. 
'Treatise on Astronomy’ attributed to .<Elfric (‘Popular Treatises on Science,’ 
Wright, p. 3), in which this passage occurs: ‘ Seo sunne getacnetJ urne Hselend 
Crist, se tSe ys rihtwisnesse sunne, swa swa se witega cwre5, Timenlibtis auiem 
nomen Domini oritiur sol zustitiae, et sanitas in pennis eius : — tJam mannum 
]>e him ondrseda?? Codes naman pam arist rihtwisnysse sunne, and hselfe is'on 
hyre fitJerum.’ The sun betokens our Saviour Christ, who is the sun of righteous- 
ness, as the prophet said : ‘ Upon the men who fear God’s name^ shall arise the 
sun of righteousness, and health is in Ms wings.’ The prophecy is in Mai. iv. 2. 

Page 17, 1. 3. forbrpkan. Note the MS. reading in footnote. Some emen- 
dation is clearly necessary, and I suggest that in the text as better preserving*' the 
alliteration. 7, norw© buten. The Latin original makes the passage clear : 

* Querit angustum lapidis foramen 5 
Vix movens sese vehiensque tandem 
Tnde pertransit spoliatque carnem 

Pelle vetusta.’ 

Thus narwe refers to dirl. ‘ He seeks a stone in which (pat . on) is a hole, 
narrow, but he forces himself (moves through with difficulty) for,* <?cc. 24. 

litel him is. * Little (advantage) will be to him from his limbs ’ ; * he shall 
have little advantage/ &c. 26. higteat. Note the shorter form hi^es in 

the next line. 

Page 18, 1. 5. It is to ned. A half-Une is lost as shown by allitera- 
tion, 6. ful of tJewes. It seems best to regard ful as imperative of OE. 
fullian, ‘ become full,’ Otherwise, we must supply the imperative of the verb 
to be, or take ful as an adjective and omit and at beginning^of the next line. 
The Latin gives no assistance, 31. Dat is iare hgved g© voile. ‘ Tknt: is like 
our head.’ The full sense is shown by the Latin, where our head refers to Christ ; 
‘Vis novus vitam sine fine dignam, 

Semper illesum caput est habendum, 

Hoc caput, dico^ quod habes in ipso 

Principe Christo.* 

heldo wA. * incline we to,’ ‘ if we incline to.’ But keldk might be % Sth. form 
for Ml. h^ldm, WS. healdan (healdan)i OM. haldan (h^ddi^ 

S 



258 


/. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


Page 10, 1. 3. S 3 ien. Note the early development of a Midland infinitive 
based on the present indicative 3rd singular. Stli. seggen, OE. secgan, still remains 
for some time. 4. soge. Pret. subj. 3rd sing., early ME. sage; cf. note on 1, 
15, and Siev. § 391, anm. 7. 9. it smit. ' It thrusts out. Smit = smtm,^ 

23. sTimer and winter winnen. ^Fair weather and storm strive together. 
The Lat. has Si sit iempestas cum vadit^ vel venit estas. 28. ^5at, MS, oar. 
The emendation was suggested by Matzner (‘ Sprachproben/ I, 69)- 

Page 20,1.10. doU hem sinken. ‘ Maketh them to sink.’ 13. Bis 
devel. The whale was so commonly used as a figure for the devil that the 
English writer begins at once with ‘ This devil,’ not following the Latin asser- 
tion of similarity : Viribus est zabuhis quasi cettis corpore magnus. This w^ 
common interpretation of such Scripture passages as Ezek. xxxiii. 2 ; Isa. xxvii. 
i; Job xli. I. X8. wosp him folege'5. Note how the indefinite wdsg 
approaches relative force by the repetition of the subject (at first the clause) in 
he. The next step was to place hi before wdsg or who^ when wosg becomes 
wholly relative to he as an antecedent, 22. gast. A short secondary form 
of OE. gdst occasionally occurring. 


IL THE STORY OF JOSEPH 

The ‘ Genesis and Exodus,’ from which this selection is taken, is found in 
MS. 444 of the Library of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge. It was edited 
by Morris in EETS. 7 (1865) and reprinted with corrections in 1874. 
Specimens are found in Matzner (‘Sprachproben,’ I, 75), Morris ('Specimens,’ I, 
153), Zupitza (' Obungsbuch,’ 81), Wulker ('Lesebuch,’ I, i). As in the case 
of the preceding selection, with which this has much in common, the language 
of the ‘ Genesis and Exodus * is of the southern portion of the East Midland, 
and the poem was composed in the first half of the thirteenth century. 
A single author, otherwise unknown, is believed to have composed the whole 
poem ; cf. Fritzsche, ‘ 1st das altenglische Story of Genesis and Exodus das 
Werk eines Verfassers/ 'Anglia,’ V, 43. Notes are to be found in 'Anglia,’ VI, 
Anz. i; XV, 191 ; XXII, 141; 'Englische Studien,’ II, 120; III, 273; XVI, 
429; XXII, 292; 'Archiv fiir nenere Sprachen,’ XC, 143; ^Mod. Lang. 
Notes,’ I, 65. 

The poem consists of a paraphrase of the Scripture story, mainly based on 
the ‘ Historia Scholastica,’ composed by Petrus Comestor between 1169 
1175, As usual in such cases the treatment is free, many parts of the Bible 
story being omitted and many additions of mediseval legend and interpretation 
being added. The metre is the rimed couplet of four stresses with iambic 
movement, but with the syllabic irregularity so common in the period. Thus 
the line often ends with an unstressed syllable after the principal stress, and as 
often lacks an unstressed syllable at the beginning. In the latter case the first 
stressed syllable forms a monosyllabic foot. Alliteration of the stressed syllables 
is sometimes found, though without the regularity of alliterative verse. Our 
selection includes lines 2037-2490, covering Genesis xxxix. 19 to 1. 14, though 
with large omissions. Another version of the story of Joseph may be read in 
' Cursor Mundi ’ (EETS. 57, 59), beginning at 1. 4037, and the part corre- 
sponding to -our selection at 1. 4417. The latter is much fuller and more’ 
dramatic, while also showing some interesting variations upon the story. • 



THE STORY OF JOSEPH 


259 


The language of the poem is similar to that of the ' Bestiary/ with which its 
orthography agrees so thoroughly that in general no further remarks are 
necessary. A few cases of 0£. diphthongs occur, as at 22, 14-1 5» but similar 
words are so frequently written with simple vowels as to prove that the older 
forms did not represent true diphthongs. Otherwise the most noticeable 
ortho^aphic peculiarity is qu for OE, hw, as in quJle (21, 5), perhaps through 
Nth. influence. The language of the poem is treated by Morris in the 
Pr-eface to his edition, by Hilmer in ' Die Sprache von Genesis und Exodus ’ 
(1876), and by Fritzsche as above. 

Pag3 21, 1. 1. Putifar trewiU; The form of Potiphar’s name is that of 
the Latin original, as are most of the other Scripture names in Genesis. 
2. losep. The form here and the rimes at 22, 21-22 and 30, 7-8 prove 
conclusively that the Latin, not OF. form of the word is meant. 3. sperd. 
Orm's sperrd (12, 26) shows the shortness of the vowel. Metrically the word 
is disyllabic, and might be written sperred\ though compare 22, 29-30. 
6. prisuner. Note that this is not the MnE. word 'prisoner.’ 13. hem 
drempte. Impersonal uses of the verb were still common, as in OE., 
though soon to disappear; see Kellner, ‘Hist. Outlines of Eng, Syntax,’ §151. 
15. on sel. Lines 15-16 paraphrase Joseph . . . viinistrabat eis of the Vulgate 
and Petrus Comestor, but the above words were added to imply regularity of 
the service. 17. he fireinde, MS. h§ hem ft-einde. The MS. reading is 
impossible metrically, unless hS hem are to be read as he'tn. The text follows 
Kblbing, ‘Eng. St,’ III, 305. 18. Harde drfmes. ‘Unpleasant (harde) 

dreams have that power,’ that is, to make people mourn. 27-28. hgnd . . . 
wrpng. , Note the assonance instead of rime. 28. me ‘Uugte. Morris says 
tSugte = togtej corrected by Egge in ^Mod. Lang. Notes/ I, 66. ME. 

‘ seemed/ and ‘ thought,’ later fell together under pou^te^ MnE. thought. 

Page 22, 11. 3-4. win . . . ’Serin. Many imperfect ririies in the poem 
show differences in vowel quantity. With rimes of long and short i cf. those 
at 28, 25-26; 29, 7-8; 30, 15-16; 31, 17-18; 34,4-5; see also 85, 21-22. 
10, Bat, MS. ISa. Morris suggested the emendation. 21, quad ~ 
quaS, ‘quoth.’ For the change cf. Gram. Introd., §§ 100, 116. 26. fleis, 

fleish. For the diphthong see Gram. Introd. Cf. vjeis (29, i). 26. agte. 

‘ Possessions, wealth/ not ‘ care ’ as Morris. The line means that no wealth 
may protect thee.’ Cf. Hg agtes (26, 32), This addition to the Scripture 
narrative is not found in Petrus Comestor, but 'occurs in ‘ Cursor Mundi,’ 
1. 4493. 

Page 23, 11. 7-8. biffren . . . com, MS. corca. The MS. reading makes 
a good eye-rime, but it is doubtful whether com was disyllabic in pronuncia- 
tion. Better assume biforn {biforn) for biforen. 12. Be ranee, MS. ISe rano 
he. The emendation makes ranee the correct plural, and leaves sevene Igne as 
the more direct subject of haven goercumen, 13. it smiten. ‘ They smote.* 
Morris regards it as a neuter plural form, but perhaps this use is derived 
from that of it as introducing plural verbs in OE. 14. IJristen to '5e, 
MS. 5rist hem to 'Ko. The emendation seems justified by the syntax. The 
plural Kristen is required and te fette must be object of it. Cf. the Latin : 
Septent spicae plenae puUulabant in culmo uno^ aliaeque totidem iuxta orie- 
hantur tenues^ et percussae uredine, et devorahant prioress 29-80. 911 .. . 
Pharaon. The NF. form of Pharaoh should rime with, long close ^,*as it 

S2 



26 g 


/. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


does at 22, i~2, 9rio. Cf. 32, 15-16, and the OF. Pharaun at 23, 21-23. 
30. tawnen. See the explanation of the form in the Glossary, and cf. MnE. 
iwit for a similar initial t from OE. at in a compound word. 

Page 24, 1. 8. gere. The noun ger = ‘ year,’ appears with the plural 

ger at 23, 31, here, and geres in 1. 25. So most OE. neuters gradually 

assumed the es ending of masculines. 17. ISaiine Putifar. Confusion in 
the names Potiphar and Potiphera of our Bible is easy from the Lat. forms 
Putiphar and Putiphara. It was then easy to make Asenath the daughter of 
Joseph’s old master, as here. Hebrew tradition explained Joseph’s marriage 
of a foreign woman by saying that Job’s second wife was Dinah, daughter of 
Jacob (Gen. xxxiv), from whom a daughter w^as bom and became the mother 
of Asenath (Petrus Comestor). Moslem tradition gave a romantic turn to the 
story by making Joseph marry Zuleekha, wife of Potiphar, after the latter’s 
death (Weil’s ‘ Biblical Legends," 97 f.). 20. Ot&x is_ nu. ‘ Another 

(condition) is now than had happened before.’ 24, He luyeden God. 

* They (the sons of Joseph) loved God, he (God) repaid it to them,* 
29. Hunger wex. The ‘ Cursor Mundi ’ shows an interesting addition, 
probably from Hebrew tradition. Joseph, after threshing, casts the chaff 
upon the Nile, where Jacob, who casually walked by that river (geography did 
not trouble many mediseval writers), found it, and sent his sons along the Nile 
to Egypt to buy com. 29-30. Chanaan . . . forlJan. Another qualitative 
rime, as Chanaan seems to be disyllabic in ‘Genesis,* though trisyllabic in 

* Cursor Mundi/ as in Latin. Cf. 32, 7-8. 

Page 25, 1. 1. for nede sogt. ■ Morris defined sogt as ^ reconciled/ asso- 
ciating it with OE. saht, but it is the past participle of sSken in the less 
common sense, of ‘attacked, driven.' 8. als. A connective olknsw (I. 7) 
and lit (1. 8), als must mean ^yet * or ‘though,’ not ‘also * as Morris. Cf. Egge, 

‘ Mod. Lang. Notes/ I, 66, and Kock, ‘Anglia/ XXV, 331. 11. cume ge. 

Note the fonn without ending before ge, as in OE. Cf. 1. 28, and with 
wS in similar position, 1. 14. Morris and Matzner change cunu to came^ 
but this is surely unnecessary, since the action is regarded as present in time, 
18. do® us, MS., do®8S. Matzner suggested dod its, though retaining the MS. 
reading. The change is simple and satisfactory. Kock (‘ Anglia,* XXV) inter- 
prets do9es as equivalent to dod'ds = doS he (Jacob) us^ but Matzner’s suggestion 
seems better. 10, Hu sulde. This addition to the Scripture is in Petrus 
Com^or: Impossibile est enim viro idiotae tales Jilios esse^ cum.etiam regibus 
tails Jiliorum copia vahte est difficilis. The first part of the line was emended 
by Morris ‘ ani man,’ but MS. oninan ~ §n man. 32. Dat he w^re. 

Kdlbing shows (‘ Eng. St.,’ HI, 305) that refers to Joseph, not lo Benjamin 
as Morris had assumed. He compares Petrus Comestor: Timehat enim m 
farie el in ilium aliquid deliquissetd. This is added to explain Joseph’s 
imprisonment of his brothers. 

Page 26, 1. 4, ®© tgn. The origmally apart of tet ipat)^ seems to have 
become an integral part of the following word, and is so printed. Cf. td}ert 
(30^ 20), which still remains in dialectal English. 6. To wedde. * For 
security/ ‘ as a pledge.’ The frequent occurrence of OE. vsed n, in this dative 
phrase’ no doubt accounts for the retention of the OE, dative form. Cf. td 
wive (?4|, 19). 12. Wrigtfiil we. ‘Deservedly we are/ translating Merito 

haei< patimutri quia peecmdmus in fsrdtwn nostrum. , 19. deden . ^ . beden. 



THE STORY OF JOSEPH 


261 


The rime assumes that both dedm and iieclen must have occurred in ^edi. 
This seems better than assuming deden , . . beden, 24. Vgr -bif^en. Cf. 
Egge (‘ Mod. Lang. Notes,’ I, 66) ; *I take in a local sense, ‘‘ there before, at 
the top,” referring to the moudi of the sacks.’ 27. ^vefSogt. Morris 
suggests * over-anxious,' but the word corresponds to obsinpefacii iurbatique of 
the Vulgate : Et obstiipefacti iurbatique muhio (Gen. xlii. 28). ‘ Amazed, 

stupefied’ are better. 31. Quan men, MS. and qnan men. And is 
omitted, as it seems to have been copied from the preceding line by mistake. 

Page 27, 1. 5. Of losep. *Of Joseph I do not know the end,’ para- 
phrasing the Vulgate, Toseph non est super. 7-8. don . . . on. Cf. rimes 
of long and short i in note to 22, 3-4. Perhaps the adverb on had long see 
rimes at 28, 5-6; 29, 27-28. 8. spgeiS, Note the plural subject with 

singular verb; probably dfaUf predominated in the mind of the writer. 
16. But ge. Note the abrupt transition from indirect to direct discourse; also 
the use of the plural pronoun in addressing one person, the earliest instance in 
English. 17. Quan it is ned. KblSng points out (‘Eng, St.,’ Ill, 306) 
that quart ‘ if ’ here, the clause translating Si sic necesse est. 18. And ic ne. 

Mat2ner adds ic here as rightly. 25. ^emoded. MatznePs emendation of 
MS. edimodes, making the word agree with its form in 1, 1584 of the poem. 
28. ben into Egypte ligt. Matzner’s reading of the line. He suggests that 
cumen of the MS. was originally a gloss of ben ligt. 30. lag, MS. was, 
making no rime. Morris’s tSag — OE. tSa is impossible, and Matzner suggests 
assonance. Koch’s late suggestion of stag — OE. stag is equally impossible, as 
OE. d has regularly become g in ‘ Genesis.'* 

Page 28, 1. 2. Her npn. ‘None of them.’ The objective nse of the 
genitive plural ; cf. fere ngn (1. 6) and gfire gn (29, 30). 7. tTe stiward. 

Matzner’s suggestion for stiward of the MS. Otherwise the pa“use after siille 
must do duty for the omitted unstressed syllable. 8. Por ic. 'This part 
of the steward’s answer does not very well agree with the Latin of the Vulgate, 
though .the probable meaning is ‘ I have my instructions.’ 11-12. come . . . 
npme. Such seems to be the rime. The first word is Orm’s come, ‘ coming,’ 
and the second OE. nain f. There may have been, however, an OM. ndm 
showing the root of the pret.pl. oiniman. 24. 'Wpt ic. ‘I think none 
there did not tremble.’ The line corresponds to the Vulgate, Et incurvati 
adoraverunt eum (Gen. xliii. 28). Incurvati was apparently understood in 
its metaphorical sense ‘disturbed in mind, trembling,’ rather than the literal 
‘bowing.’ 32, wui^'tfres wet. ‘Was wet with tears.’ The expression 
occurs with and without a preposition; cf. 30, 22, and 31, 4. 

Page 29, 1. 4. Sette liem, MS. and sette hem. The reading of the 
text seems simpler than retaining and at the beginning of this line and omit- 
ting it before him in the preceding. 12. And hem. There is nothing 
in the Scripture or Petrus Comestor for these lines, as Kblbing pointed oUt, 
In ‘ Cursor Mundi ’ the same ‘__sarmun * occurs, and the brothers are especially 
warned ugainSt theft. 18. ^ fr. * Before.* The doubling of the particle 
is not uncommon. 29. For is it nogt. All reference to divination (Gen. 
xliv. 5, 15) is omitted by the English writer here and at 30, 10. Petrus 
Comestor adds, after paraphrasing Joseph’s words about divining, Fofrte toco 
dietum est, "me est impuiandum. 30. Bat, 'MS. tSa. Morris’s emendation, 
#hich seems -necessary. 82. trp qnam. A very-eariy use of ^<5!;s^,'‘ whom,’ 



262 


/. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


as a relative pronoun. Such use appears first in the oblique cases^ but is not 
established until Late Middle and Early Modern English. 

Page 30, 1. 1. He be slagen. Matzner’s emendation from MS. reading 
he slagen, agen. * Back,’ not ‘again,’ as Moiris. ‘ There is no reference 
to an earlier state of slavery’ (Egge). 

Page 31, 1. L lewse. This seems to be the only form of the MS., 
occuriing also at 1. 1576. No doubt the form should be leswe, OM. les 
/acc. leswe\ WS connected with OE. lesan-icesy^ lo glean.’ G-eraen. 
The Lat. form is Gessen^ which a copyist seems to have transformed by 
mistaking s for r. With this rime with long e cf. 31, 12-13; 32, I2-’13, 
where the vowel is clearly short. 9. For luve of losep migte he 
timen The hl;n of 1. 8 and the he here seem to refer to the father (30, 31), 
and the line means ‘For (on account of) love of Joseph might he prosper.’ 
The rime of timen here and in other places may indicate shortening. 
19 Also fele, Kolbing suggested connecting with following rather than 
preceding line. It translates Petrus Comestor, Et totidem (referring to Ben« 
jamin’s gift) inisit pairi. 

Page 32, 1. 3. W0I me. No verb is necessary in the exclamation. Cf. 
wumme (195, 33). 6. And sen. Matzner adds him, but it is unnecessary 

and adds an extra syllable to the line. 8. manie a man. Note the early 
introduction of a to make the singular number clear, indefinites tending to lose 
their singular uses and forms. 15. Fader dlere, MS. doror. Matzner s change. 
20. «a, MS. «og. The cop>ist was influenced by the preceding ddg just 
above; cf. Gen. xlvii. 9. 23. S9 «inke«. Kolbing (‘Eng. St.,’ Ill, 307) 

pointed out that the speech of Jacob ends with the preceding line, these words 
paraphrasing a comment of Petrus Comestor i Teyegnmattonis dtxtt, quia 
sancti viiam hanc pro incolaiu habent^ 29. Him and hise, MS, he. 
The change is Matzner’s. 

Page 33, 1. 2 . fowrtene ger, MS. xiiij. The writer is in error, as the Vulgate 
reads decern et septem annos. That the error is not a copyist’s is clear from 
the fact that ME. seveniene would be too long to replace fowrtene. 6. off 
he, MS. offe. Matzner added //Rafter oje, and Schumann (‘Anglia,’ VI, Anz. r) 
proposed the reading adopted. 7- Bat quan it wui^e. Literally, ‘that 
when it should be done with him,’ an idiom easily understood to-day though 
not a literary form. 16. hem. Kolbing (‘ Eng. St.,’ Ill, 307} would change 
hem to him, referring to Crist (1. 14) only. Pie quotes the comment of 
Petrus Comestor ; Cura fuit sanciis sepeliri in terra, qua sciebant Christum 
resurrecturum, ut cum eo resurgerent. But surely the wish of Jacob twice 
repeated (Gen. xlvii. 30; xlix. 29) was to be buried with his fathers, and it is 
more likely that hem is correct. It would include Christ with hise eldeie 
(1. 13). 27. smaken. Matzner alters to nidken, but the sense of smdken 

is clear ; cf. 14, 2. 28. biwakeu. The whole passage upon the burial customs 

occurs in Petnis, though with several slight differences. 29-30. daiges . . . 
laiges. For forms see Gram. Introd. 

. Page 84, 1. 6. delveu it wiiS yre. ‘ Bury it with iron (instrument).’ The 
last • two words add nothing of value, but no doubt the whole was a common 
expression in rime. X2-1S. mide . . . wechdede. Perhaps for mide we should 



FLORJS AND BLAUNCHEFLUR 


263 


read mede (tnide’i) with the vowel of ON. med, Dan, med. Cf. 34, 30-31, 
21. wel him, ‘Well may it be with him (Jff hi?n) that has done well.’ 
30-31. dede . . . mide. Another rime which shows the short form of ME. dede^ 
if not indeed that which Orm regularly uses, dide. 


III. 'FLORIS AND BLAUNCHEFLUR’ 

The story of ‘ Floris and Blauncheflur/ of which this selection forms a part, 
is found in four MSS. : Gg. 4, 27, 2 of Cambridge University Library; Cotton 
Vetellius D. Ill of the British Museum ; Auchinleck MS. of the Advocates’ 
Library, Edinburgh; Trentham MS. of the Duke of Sutherland’s Library. 
Of these the first and best, so far as complete, was edited by Lumby, EETS. 
14 (1866), and re-edited by Dr. G. McKnight in 1901, Other editions of 
the poem are those by Hartshome (‘Ancient Metrical Tales’ (1829)), Laing 
(Abbotsford Club Publ- (1857)). A critical edition, with valuable introduc- 
tion from a comparative standpoint, was made by Emil Hausknecht for the 
‘ Sammlung englischer Denkmaler* of Zupitza in 1885. The Cambridge 
MS. belongs to the middle, possibly the second quarter, of the thirteenth 
century. The language is that of the Southeast Midland, with a considerable 
number of strictly Southern forms, as shown by the footnotes. This direct 
Southern influence points to a district farther south than that of the ‘ Bestiary ’ 
or * Genesis and Exodus.’ Owing to the mixture of Southern with Midland 
forms this selection does not represent the East Midknd in its purity, but 
is added largely because of its greater literary interest. The metre of the 
poem is the rimed couplet of four, sometimes three, stresses. 

‘ Floris and Blauncheflur ’ is a romantic tale, probably of Eastern origin, 
and brought to the West in the twelfth century, perhaps by crusaders. The 
English poem was freely translated and condensed from a French version, 
and is one of the earliest of a long series of French romances in Middle 
English literature. The main current of the story to the beginning of our 
selection (1, 433 of Camb. MS., 847 of the Hausknecht text) is as follows. 
Floris and Blauncheflur had become passionately attached as children. The 
father of Floris, the king of Spain, disapproves of the union, and suggests 
killing the maiden. In the original French version Blauncheflur is the 
daughter of a Christian captive, and the father of Floris a Saracen. The 
queen, mother of Floris, proposes sending him away, and this was done. 
Blauncheflur is then sold to the ‘ Admiral ’ of Babylon for a marvellous cup, 
a tomb is erected, and Floris, on his return, is told that she is dead. He is 
so heart-broken that he attempts his life, and the king and queen reveal to 
him the truth. Floris proposes to seek Blauncheflur, and the king gives him 
the marvellous cup, the queen a magic ring. He has various adventures in his 
search, and finally reaches Babylon. Here, by giving him the marvellous cup 
and promising great wealth, Floris at last persuades the porter of the tower in 
which Blauncheflur is confined to assist him. Then follows our selection. 

The Southern forms in the original text have been largely replaced by those 
of the Midland. This applies especially to those with «, OE. .y, and in- 
flexional forms, while some with eo 36, j6), which would probably not 
be found as late as this text but for' Southern influence, have been retained. 
Besides these peculiarities, among vowels may be mentioned the rare use of 



264 MIDLAND DIALECT 

0 for u (Aongling, 44, 3), a tisage to become much more common m the follow- 
ing selections. Among consonants, the regular use of ^ ior y initially and for a 
palatal and guttural spirant medially separates these sounds from the stop g (as 
in zo\ though the latter character is still used for ^ (as mjugem^t 2). 

For the latter sound initially, OF. j also appears. OF. c — s is found 
cerfes ( 38 , 1 1), Clarke ( 38 , 3), and seA for s/i. Contrary to the practi^ of the 
last two texts represents OE. hw^ as in Orm. Among innexiorml forms, 
a few with the prefix i^OE.ge have been left, as perhaps properly belonging 
to SEMI., at least longer than to Ml. and Nth. English. A special treatinent 
of the language occurs in Hausknecht’s edition, with which cf. ‘ gt.,^ 

IX, 92, ‘ Anglia,’ Anz., VIlI, 150. For notes see ' Anglia, 1 , 473 ; Eng. St., 
Ill, 99 j 2 3 ^ 9 * 

Page 35 , 1 . 15 . cuperu Hausknecht takes this as OF. cttpe, not Sth. 
cupe « OE. cype, because of the form in the Auchinleck MS., coup (coz^ppe) 
^me. The meaning is the same in either case. 10 . gegges. I he 
Trenth. MS. has may dens. 20. for hfvie. A substantive use of the 

adjective, as in the colloquial ‘for cold,’ ‘for hot.’ 28 . lete hire stunde. 
Hire refers to the basket {ctp\ the SEMI, apparently agreeing with Sth. in 
preserving grammatical gender later than in Ml. and N th, ; cf, he referring to 
ring ( 43 , 16). The adverb stunde, MS. stonde^ completes the rime and sense : 
‘and go forth and leave it (Jiire) at once/ It is easy to see how stunde was 
misunderstood for signde. 

Page 36 , 11 , 1 - 2 . wolde . . . bihplde. Long 0 in wolde is proved by 
occasional rimes like these, though the short form is equally clear from Orm s 
tuollde ; cf. 23-24. Otherwise we must assume qualitative rimes only, in such 
cases. 7-8. rfde . . . hadde. These two lines, with imperfect rime, are 
found only in Camb. MS. and are rejected by Hausknecht from his critical text. 
Perhaps we are to read h^de (OE. hade <; ha!f^\ 9 . age, MS. agen. The 
MS. rime agen , . . hipt is of course impossible. Age, from Auch. MS., and 
a slight change in the following line, makes all right. Trenth. MS. reads : 

‘ When he sawj it was not shee, 

Into pe lepe ajen stert he.’ 

15 - 16 . itqld . . , isfld. The retention of the OE. prefix ge- ns i-, occasion- 
ally found in M 1 ., is characteristic of Sth. English ; cf. zfere (37,22). 16 . beo. 
Note the Sth. feminine of the pronoun, as well as the ^ OE. diphthong eo. 
‘17. Ifpe. An infinitive dependent upon comen, as Ziipitza pointed out in 
‘Anglia,’ I, 473 : ‘ Now maidens came running (leaping) in to her.* 19 . what 
liire were. ‘ What might be to her/ that is, ‘ what was the matter with her? ’ 
a common idiom. 21 . Wei heo was bijjojt. ‘ She was very (well) con^ 
siderate and (considered) where to find them answer ’ j or could whare be for 
ware, ‘ wary ’ ? Trenth. MS. has : 

‘Clarys by]?ou5t hur anoon ry5t 
}?at hit was Blauncheflur Je white. 

And gave Jje maydens answere anoon/ 

23 . ich, MS. iho always. This can hardly indicate the true Sth. form ich — 
itf ich in chttrch), but rather a SEMI, ic in which e (^) is shading out into 
a spirant like German ch in ich. 

Page 37 , 1 . 2. Wilt u. Usually printed as one word, but in this book the 
identity of each word has been consistently preserved by separating even the 



•FLORIS AND BLAUNCHEFLVR 


265 


reduced forms, as here. 8. libbe. Another form at least more common in 
the South. In Ml. and Nth. bb of the OE. infin. and ind. pres. 1st sing, has 
been replaced by v, by analogy of the 3rd sing, and the other forms of the verb. 
Cf. MnE. have, live, and for a similar loss of^, He (' recline ’), Inty, say, lay. 

Page 38,1. 3. pp. This addition to the MS. line seems to be required by 
the metre, though not added by Hausknecht. 6. o == of. Theoretically we 
must assume a long as in J from on, but partly to differentiate the two wor ds 
I have used short 0 in this word, even in these early instances. 22. Ower 
beire. An objective genitive, ‘ of you two.* 25-26. adiin . . . fram. An 
impossible rime. All other MSS. read aroum {aroom, rown), i, e. ariim, 
OE. on{afi), gerum, * apart,’ and no doubt this is the correct form, though 
giving assonance only with adiin. 

Page 38, 11. 13-14. wite . . . Tinder5ete. Correct rime form here requires 
tmdergite, not uncommon in Sth., or possible wete < wite, ' But they might 
not long guard them, that they should not be perceived,’ or as we should say, 

‘ They could not long prevent them from being perceived.’ 

Page 40, 1. 4. loke. So MSS., but syntax requiies Idked, in which final d 
is rarely dropped. 15-16. arist . . . atwist. Matzner explains the first as 
a contracted form of arisetS (Siev. ‘ Angelsachsische Gram.,’ § 359, 8), and the 
second as an analogical preterit like OE. wiste. We should expect -preterits 
in both cases from the form of the narrative, but no such preterit as arist seems 
to be known. 23. piler. The pillar in which the water-pipes were con- 
cealed. 28. He axede. The pronoun refers to Admiral, which the other 
MSS. repeat here as in 40, 2. 

Page 41, 11. 9-10. mup . . . cuj>. Perhaps we should read mM}e ds., 
€ft}e pi. of the adjective. 11. te5. The short form belongs here, or the rime 
is qualitative only, as in 11, 21-22. 19-20. cast© . . . breste. With keste for 

caste, a not uncommon ME. form, the rime would be correct ,* cf. 42, 3^4. Breste 
is an OE. neuter which has not yet acquired the es plural. 30. ligge. A 
characteristic Sth. form, the prevailing Ml. being Cf. note on 37, 8. 

Page 42, 1. 30. hqudhabbing. A legal expression handed down from 
OE. times, the original word being a participle handheebhende cf, * Anc. Laws 
and Inst, of England,’ I, Index, hmbhendee handa. 

Page 44, 1. 32. 5et. This word has not been satisfactorily explained, but 
the best assumption seems to be that it is for Ssd(e), with wifdra^e as an infini- 
tive depending upon it ; ' And Blauncheflur went (endeavoured) to withdraw 
him.* 

Page 45, 1. 2. pat oper. The line is too short metrically, and probably 
we should read pat eifer d}er deide bifgre ; cf. 37, 29 and 46, 5. 

Paige 46, 1. 1. of Spaygne. It looks as if this were originally a gloss 
which had been thrust into the line, perhaps because the beginning of the story 
is incomplete in all the English texts, and the connexion of Floris’s father with 
the Saracens Was lost sight of. 



266 


/. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


IV. ‘DEBATE OF THE BODY AND THE SOUL’ 

The ‘ Debate of the Body and the Soul’ is found in six MSS. : Auch. MS., 
Ediiiburph. j Liaud MS. ro8, and Vernon MS.j both of the Bodleian j IDi^by 
MS. 102, Royal MS. i8 AX, and Additional MS. 22, 283 of the Bntish 
Musenin. Onr text is from Laud MS. 108, which was edited by Th. Wright in 
‘Latin Poems commonly attributed to Walter Mapes,’ by Matzner (‘ Sprach- 
proben,’ I, 92), and by Linow in ‘ Erlanger Beitriige zur englischen Philologie, 
in which the Laud M S. is accompanied by three others and an important intro- 
duction, together with appendices. The ‘ Debate * was writt^ in the second 
half of the thirteenth century, and the Laud MS. represents East Midland m 
the main, of northern rather than southern variety, but with a considerable 
number of Sth. forms. The interest of the poem rather than the purity of the 
text has led to its inclusion here. , 

The ‘Debate’ is based on a motive common in Western Europe in the 
middle ages. It finds expression in Old and Early Middle English in an 
‘ Address of the Soul to the Body.’ The * Debate ’ or ‘ Dialogue betwe^ the 
two belongs to Middle English only; cf. Bruce, ‘ A Contribution to the Study 
of the Body and the Soul Poems in English * (‘ Mod. Lang. Notes, 

To the ‘Debate’ two poems bear close relation, the Latin ‘Visio Fulberti 
(Philberti) ’ printed by Wright in the above-mentioned work, as by Menl m 
‘Poesies populaires latines anterieures au douzieme siecle,’ and an OF. poetn 
‘ Un Samedi par Nuit,’ Anhang I, to Linow above. A modem version of 
the ‘Debate’ was made by Sir Theodore Martin in the ‘Monk’s Dream, 
and one was printed by Prof. F. J. Child of Harvard for private circulation. 
The metre of the poem is an eight-line stanza made up of lines with four 
stresses and iambic movement, riming abababah, with the b rimes more exact 
than the others. The poem has been treated in relation to sources, language, 
metre, by Kleinert, ‘Uber den Streit zwischen Leib u. Seele’ (1880), Heesch, 

‘ Uber Sprache u. Versbau’ (1884), Linow as above, Kunze, ‘}?e Disputisoun 
bitwen Jie Bodi and pe Soule ’ (1892), Bruce as above. 

Special peculiarities of language which appear for the first time are the new 
diphthongs ei{ey) and au (ou) before palatal and guttuial 9 ii") respectively, as 
ei^e?ze ( 51 , 25), sau^ ( 47 , 27). The former occur rarel^n ‘ Genesis and Exodus,’ 
as already noted. Here also a — u commonly, and ou *=* u almost invariably. 
Among consonants ^ represents OE. /^w, as in ^Tlene ( 48 , 12), and ^ih of the 
MS. = at OAt). Owing to lateness of the MS.^ copy, rather than the poem, 
final ^ is often omitted, or added to words to which it does not belong. These 
peculiarities, as scribal, have been placed in the footnotes. Strictly Sth. forms 
have also been placed in the footnotes, and attention will be called to some of 
Nth. origin. The much more frequent loss of final n in inflexional forms 
should be noted in this and the following selection. 

Page 47 , 1 . 26 . dxoupening. The MS. reading droukening can hardly 
be correct, as it must be connected with ON. drmhia, ‘ to drown,’ an inappro- 
priate meaning. Auch. and Vern. MSS. have droupening {droupnynge), while 
Digby MS. has derkyng, as if the scribe had not understood the form before 
him. 

Page 48 , 1 . 2. to pay, ‘For pleasure, satisfaction.* The MS. pay ^ 
seems to indicate that, at the time of the copy, ^ had already shaded out into - 



^ ms ATE OF THE BODY AND THE SOUL* 267 


since it is here added to an OF. word to which it could not have belonged. 
Cf. similar forms in the footnotes. 5. g§st it. Such repetition of the sub- 
ject in pronoun form, originally used for emphasis, came to be employed by the 
metrist to complete his line. Cf. Kellner, ‘ Hist Eng. Syntax/ § 284, 286. 
6. It, MS. yt. Initial y for z has usually been replaced by the latter in these 
early selections, to reduce the number of variants, especially in initials. 
18. lede. The changes of meaning and use in this word are especially 
interesting. First,’ ‘Latin (tongue),’ a borrowed adjective; next, ‘dis- 
course, speech, in Latin ’ ; then, ‘ any tongue, language, speech ’ ; here, 

‘ speech in sense of voice,’ perhaps ‘boasting speech’ ; the word may also 
mean ‘ song of a bird.’ 21. 3were ben. In Laud MS. this and the next 
stanza change places, all other MSS. giving the order of the text. The Auch. 
MS. also has another stanza between the two. 26. fedde, MS. ledde. 
The other MSS. have/^^/ (Jeddes). Feddes would agree in use with leddes, but 
would not rime with Jledde (^1. 28). 

Page 49, 1. 10. gpn to greipe. So Auch. MS., which seems better metii- 
cally than gpn grei^e, though the latter is the older syntax. Two forms have 
-developed, that of Auch, MS., and and gt'eife of Digby, a. well -known 
form in colloquial and dialectal English. 16. me bigfte. At this point 
the Laud MS. lacks seventeen stanzas as compared with the Auch. text. Eleven 
of these continue the speech of the ‘ Soul ’ (see Linow, or a modernization), after 
w^hich the ‘ Body ’ (Auch. MS.), 

‘ Lift up his heved open pe swere ; 

As it were sike it gan to gron, 

And seyd, “ Wheper pou art mi fere, 

Mi gost )>at is fro me gon?’” 

The ‘ Body ’ admits that it must decay, and then turns upon the ‘ Soul ’ with 
a countercharge : 

‘ Soule, 5if pou it me wilt atwite, 
pat we schul be hope yspilt, 

5if pou hast schame and gret despite, 

A1 it is pine owhen gilt. 

Y pe say at wordes lite, 

Wip ri5t resoun sif pat ow wilt, 
pou berst pe blame and y go quite; 
pou scholdest fram schame ous have yschilt." 

Then follow the stanzas at 49, 17. 14. swelle. Note the new vowel which 

has developed in the MS. suwelh, and cf. koweynts (48, 15). 17, pe schop, 

MS. sohop pe. The text is the reading of all the MSS. except Laud. If the 
poet intended to mark the contrast between (the ‘Soul’) and the ‘Body,’ 
the Laud MS. is correct. 22. god, Ma guod. The MS. form is of Nth. 
origin, unless peihaps Kentish can be assumed to have influenced the Laud MS, 
26/ dumb and daft. An example of the alliterative phrases, once so common, 
and ‘still often preserved in poetry. Cf. lime and lyp (50, 15), tenu and qche 
(50, 27), linde and {61: 2 i\ fild and fenne (51, 23). Under the influence 
of these phrases of OE. origin new ones have often been made, as piU and 
pi} (50, 13), where the first is OF., and preye and prlche (51, l), where both 
words are of OF. origin. In rest and rd (51, 19) the second is ON., and in 
Mven and }rg (51, 17) both are of Norse origin. 24. me pertil. Me, 
Emitted in LaUd, oc'curs in all othe^ MSS. and is necessary to the metre. 



©68 


/. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


Page 50, 1. 3. gast. Both and occur in the poem, the latter 
riming mth short iz, as at 58, 13, so that it probably represents not Nth.^^r/, 
but a secondary form from OE. g'dsL Cf. Morsbach, ' Mitteleng. 

§ 62 anm. 22. dist. A somewhat unusual shortening of didesi. Cf. the 
foim in rime at 54, 4. 28. 3wat was yvel. Linow has the impossible 

reading ^wat was wcl from a misunderstanding of Sth. iivcl of the MS. ^wat 
at the beginning of the line was suggested by Matzner ; cf. ^58, 22. 

Page 51, 1. 9. edest. The shorter 'and eailier edes yfOMld. make the rime 
perfect. Cf. leddes (48, 24). 13. Ho may. This stanza, found at this place 

in Auch. and Digby MSS., occurs in Laud after. 56, l6. As to sense it fits 
either place. 18. Mi5tis did, MS. mittis ded. Matzner proposed the 
reading of the text. Pluralizing an abstract noun for emphasis was common in 
OE., and remained in the ME. period sometimes ; cf. Kellner, * Hist. Eng. 
Syntax,’ § 21. 19. ro. Though from QN. ro{r), and so having close it 

is possible the d has become openmnder the influence of preceding r, 20. me 
in pine, Matzner added z;;/, which occurs in all the other MSS. 

Page 52, 1. 3. ni^t, ni^th. This is the beginning in our texts of the spr- 
ing ~ ;?/ {^h£), Cf. he » ch in * Floris and Blauncheflur.’ 8. Oomepou. 
« If thou shouldst come.’ Subjunctive in transposed clause, as in MnE. ‘ had I.’ 
14. Sat OP stod. That is, ' (Where) sat (I) or stod,’ in ellipsis with the pre- 
ceding line. 21. pat tou ne were. ‘ That thou were not (present) and 
advised course (counsel), ’ that is, ‘ Unless thouwert present, ’-&a, ‘ I never did,’ 
&c. 23. mowen. The shortened form mown is necessary for the rime ; 

cf. 78, 31. 29. chatinged, MS. cliaunclied. Matzner suggested the 

change, which is obviously necessary. 

Page 53, 1. 7. ITevere of catfl, 'I should have ’ from the first line is to 
be supplied. Then nome ( = 7iume) is a past parliciplcdepending upon ‘ should 
have.’ 10. He were pewit. ‘Were it. not for the wit that was wholly 

thine.' 18. S9 doth. ‘As doth that (one) who dares no other (thing).' 
26. gete, MS. getin. The change seems necessary for metre, and is proper 
owing to the many infinitives which have lost final ?z. 30. bftin and 

birst. Matzner connects the last word with hersten, ‘ burst, broken,’ but the pp. 
in Ml. would be bersted regularly, while both form and meaning point to OE. 
gebrysed with syncopation of e and shortening pf-the vowel after metathesis. 

Page '64, 1, 4. cdst. So MS., although breaking the rime sequence. 
Perhaps dirst^ ‘durst,* connected with OE. dy{r)s£e, found once in the Kush- 
worth ‘Matthew,’ a Mercian text. 13. gloterie. Altered by Linow and 
Matzner to glotome^ but a substantive of this form, with the same meaning as 
glotonlCy occurs in OF. works. 22. we. Matzner , added to the text as 
necessary. So also dide in 1. 27, though ‘Matzner uses the Sth. form dude, 
24. pou sau5. It has been customary to add })d^^ * though,’ at the beginning 
of this line, and Vem. and Digby MSS. so read. Auch. MS. reads : 

‘Litel hede tok pou of ]?at 

When Jjou seise ded men in grave.' 

This seems to indicate that the third line of the stanza refers to the fourth and 
not to the second, and I therefore keep the MS, heading. The ‘Body' took 
no heed of the many dead seen in the grave, and thought no such fate could 
come to it. 



DEBATE OF TFIE BODY AND THE SOUL' 269 


Page 66, 1 . C. Aby . . . abj 5 e. Note the double forms of the same 
verb, one without the spirant 11 . 9^ imti^ht. Matzner sa3S, 'only 

orthographically different from an uniikt of Vein. MS./ but gn implies greater 
emphasis on the word than would be implied by the article. 26 . leiu 
931 lipnd. Matzner interpreted Uin as ‘conceal, hide/ and Linow regards 
gn as an adverb modifying lein^ taking hgnd as a direct object. I assume 
that MS. 07 t is *' one/ and that the expression means ‘ lay a (one) hand,' 
i. e. ' initiate one hand that hath turned to shame and sin.' 

Page 56 , 1 . 7 . 5waniie Jje bKnde. Cf. Matt. xv. 14. 12. las. Matzner 

assumes this is pret, of lesen=^Igs (OE. leosan — leas\ ‘lose/ when it must be 
accounted a shortened form,, certainly not common. I propose the pret. of 
l^sen^las (OE. lesan-las)^ ‘gather, collect’; ‘for all my love on thee 
1 collected or centered.’ The usual, but special sense of ‘ glean,* is not the 
only one, as shown by ‘Elene' 1238, where ic less is used intransitively. 
23 . pey. Note the double forms of the pronoun ]>ey^ he ( 1 . 8) in this poem. 
29 . pus sone. The Auch. MS. reads so ‘ so young/ and Vem. and Digby 
]>us }ong. There seems no sufficient reason for departing from the Laud reading. 

Page 67 , 1 . 4 . mes. Note the plural without ending in an OF. word 
ending in s* With its meaning of ‘messes, courses at table,’ cf. OE. sand 
{sgnd)i ME. sande (sgnde) from send. 12. Nim of me. Laud MS. reads 
on, all others 0/, souk is appositive, of course. 18 . bochere. Both 
Laud and Vem. MSS. read bo])ekre^ Auch. hucher, Digby, bell-wether. The 
Auch. reading is to be preferred. 21. trotevale. The ori^n of the word is 
obscure. Perhaps from OF. *troievaley with some such meaning as ‘ a trifling 
thing.’ Halliwell quotes : 

‘Yn games and festys and at the ale 

Love men to lestene trotevale.’ 

Page 68, 1 . 20, in a lake. ‘In a lake.’ The MSS. vary greatly, as if 
the passage were misunderstood. Auch. reads : 

‘And se]3])en into a pit yeast 
Unto a nadder and a snake.’ 

Page 69 , 1 , 1 . pe wayn. Matzner thinks the reference is to the wagon 
used for cariydng the> dead body, and cites Turner’s ‘ Hist, of the Anglo- 
Saxons,* III, 84, 2 . leid p0 spfchB. ‘ Laid (aside) the speech.* Auch. 

MS. reads ; 

And J)e tong haj> lotn his speche,’ 

giving the sense clearly. The other MSS. agree with Laud. 9 . P9. 
Matzner would change to fou^ ‘ thou.’ The Auch. MS. gives the sense : 

‘When ])ou feldest Je sike and sere.’ 

Our line may be read, ‘ When that (the life) was so sick and sere.’ 19 . And 
‘ And might five (times) such as there are in the world of all things,* 
that is ‘ five times as many thing^ as there are in the world.’ 

Page/ 60 , 1 . 4 . A pmisand develene^ The, plural devekne — Ml. devels 
is anatber indication of Sth. influence in this poem. 10. With brpde 
buleheisv . In the middle ages devils were often pictured as having the most 
hidectua deformities. 20. ohoinke aboiitezi* Matzner proposed the emenda- 
tion* 



270 


1 . THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


Page 61 , 1 . 12. a ogte. Matzner alters to coltc, ‘ colt,’ on the ground Aat 
the devil was often represented as a horse. I have preserved the MS. reading, 
assuming that if the word is for colfe the I has already been lost, thus preserving 
the rime. 18 . ilke a grgte. Note the addition of a after ilke^ to make the 
singular clear. Cf. note on 3*2, 8. 80 . to him were let, MS. led. Surely 

led is impossible in both rime and meaning; Ut^ * permitted, fits both exactly. 

Page 62 , 1 . 6. Banston (MS. Hauston) and Bewis. All but Laud MS. 
agree in using alliterative names: Auch. Bausan and BewezniSf Woin, Bauson 
and Beufys^ Pigby Bauman and Beaufitz. Can the original names in Laud 
be connected with those in the OF. lomance ‘ Beuves d’Hanstone ’ ? 30 . to 

wrpper hfle. Wrgper seems to be an old fern. dat. sing, which has become 
fossilized in this stereotyped expression. 

Page 64 , 1 . 6. pg alle sinful. The Laud line is too long metrically, and 
Vem., Digby agree in alle synful. 


V. 'ADAM AND EVE’ 

The metrical 'Adam and Eve,’ or 'Canticum de Creatione* as it has been 
called, occurs in Auchinleck MS. at Edinburgh, and Trinity College MS, 57 at 
Oxford. The former, from which our selection is taken, was edited by Laing 
for the Abbotsford Club (1857), and by Horstmann, ^ Altenglische Legenden’ 
(1878), p. 130. Prose versions of the story are found in Vem. MS. (Horst- 
mann’s ‘Legenden,’ 1878, p. 120), Egerton MS. 876, Harl. MS. 4775, Bodl. 
MS. 596, both the latter having been edited by Horstmann for the ‘ Archiv fiir 
neuere Sprachen,’ LXXIV, 345. The language of the poem is that of the 
SEMI, dialect,' as shown by Bachmann in his excellent monograph 'Die 
beiden Versionen des ME. Canticum de Creatione,’ and the time of writing 
about 1 300. 

The poem contains an apocryphal sto^ of the fall of man, the repentance 
and penance of Adam and Eve, and their death. It is based on the *■ \ itae 
Adae et Evae ’ (see edition of W. Meyer, 1878). Just before the beginning of 
the selection Adam, in his last illness, has commanded Eve to go with Seth to 
Paradise, where they are to receive a message from God. They are met in the 
way by the devil, who bites Seth in the face before the latter commands him to 
be gone. Then they proceed on their jonmey as in the passage chosen. To 
the latter version, represented by the Trinity MS,, was added the story of the 
cross tree, said to have grown from the seeds brought by Seth from Paradise 
and placed under Adam’s tongue on his deathbed. Both stories also appear 
in ' Cursor Mundi,’ 1 . 1237 f. The metre is the rimed couplet of four stresses, 
with occasional lines of three stresses and other irregularities. 

The language shows fewer peculiarities than any selection so far. The MS- 
omits final ^ in a number of forms to which it must be restored on metrical 
gi'ounds, probably indicating that the copyist’s speech had lost this sound, 
though perhaps owing only to scribal carelessness. On the other hand, the metre 
proves that final e was beginning to disappear in many classes of words, as 
pronouns and other unstressed words. Bachmann also thinks that final e 
at the end of the line was wholly lost, but his position seems not to be 
demonstrated by the examples cited. See his monograph for a fuller treatment 
of language. 



^ ADAM AMD EVD 


^71 

!Page 64, 1. 12. ne, MS, no. The MS* form can hardly be regarded as the 
emphatic negative ng, OE. nay and must be an orthographic variant of un- 
stressed ne\ cf. o^ahi of MS. at 65, 23. 13. Sche ne durst nou3t. Earlier 

in the poem Adam had told Eve to lake Seth : 

‘For he ha]? noujt trespast so miche 
As have we, sikerliche, 

]?erfore he may Jje balder be 
To speke wi]? Jhesu Crist "Jjan we.’ 

20. an angel bri^t. According to the Trinity version this is Mi^hel^ 
‘ Michael.’ 21, manere, MS. maner. The MS. shows lack of final e in. 
a number of places in which it must have been originally written or pro- 
nounced; cf. term (1. 25 and 65, i), meti (66, 5), &c. 26. Of five 

pdusande. That is, as is not very clearly told, until Christ’s death and the 
‘harrowing of hell’ during his three days in the grave. Cf. the various 
versions of the harrowing of hell ’ story in Old and Middle English, and 
67, 23* 

Page 65, 1. 12. 11556, MS. 116750. change is fully justified by the 
rimes crie . , , dye (67, 3-4), dyen , , (68, 29-»3o), . progeme (69, 

9~io). Such rimes as hey^e. . ,sei^e (67*, 17-18), hey^e . . ,sUi^e (68, 7-8) 
probably represent older forms still preserved by the scribe. 23. a5ain, 
MS. o5ain. The MS. form may mean o^aifiy but probably 0 is merely the 
weak vowel in unstressed syllable, and it is altered to reduce the number of 
variants, especially of initials. 

Page 66, 1. 9, Q, This is the strong form of the OE. interjection a, and 
accounts for MnE. 0 (oh). The weak fc^ A, from which MnE. comes, 
occurs at 25, 23 and commonly. 11. ous. The regular spelling with ou 
indicates the preservation of long u in this dialect, beside the short form, for 
which w^have the authcmly of Orm’s ms. On the other hand, rimes like 
^tis . . . ous (11. 27-28), oiis . . .Jesus (70, 7-8 and 74, 19-20) indicate the 
short form, though the written form is the same and has been retained. 
13-14. liven . . . even. Such a rime cannot be wholly reconciled in its, 
stressed vowels, but rime of unstressed syllables were often regarded as 
sufficient; cf. childer . .. elder (11. 17-18).* 32. alle pe li5tnisse. In the 

‘Revelation of Moses’ (above) the sun and moon fell down and prayed for 
Adam, and were * black-looking, because they could not shine in the presence 
of the Light of the Universe, and for this reason their light was hidden’; 
Ante-Nicene Fathers, VIII, 565, 569. 

Page 67, 1. 7. bok, MS. boke. Both forms appear in the poem, though- 
the word is usually disyllabic. Here, however, a disyllable is impossible in 
perfect rime. 17. sit. The contract form for sittej as occasionally. 
18. Adam soule. A genitive without endifig in proper names, especially 
Biblical names, is not uncommon, no doubt through the influence of the Latin 
Scriptures in which it so occurs ; cf. David lond (72, 5). 

Page 68, 11. 11-12. mold . . . wold. Perhaps molde . . . vodldiy the final 
e in each case being organic ; but cf. mold . . . schold (71, 23-24). Such rimes 
seem to indicate long forms of wSldie), schdld{e), beside the usual short ones ; 
cf, note on 36, 1-2. 13. ^ete lay Abel. There is no reference to this in 

the Trinity MS. version, but it occurs in the apocryphal ‘Revelation of 
Moses,’ Ante-Nicene Fathers, VIII, 570. 



/. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


272 

Page 69 , 1 . 23 . fader liif be write. Petrus Comestor, following another 
tradition, says that Enoch invented letters and wrote certain books from 
which the death of Adam is known. 

Page 71 , 1 . 22. In stgn. In the Trinity version Eve is represented as 
having been more explicit in her directions. Seth was to make * tables tweye : 

*Tweye of erthe and tweye of ston, 

For long er domesday falle, 
pis worlde shal ben fordon alle 
By water or by fere (fire).’ 

The stone pillars would thus resist water, and the earth the fire. This Hebrew 
tradition appears commonly- Petrus Comestor, following Josephus (ch. ii), 
says two such pillars of marble and tile were made by Tubalcain to preserve 
the knowledge of his arts; ‘Hist. Schol.,’ Gen. xxviii, also ‘Genesis and 
Exodus/ 461, ‘Cursor Mundi/ 1533. 

Page 74 , 1 . 13 . com- So the MS., as if final e were not preserved in the 
infinitive. Probably, however, we should read come = cume^ to rime with 
Tiome = nu7ne^ since final e must certainly be added within the line as shown 
by the metre. 


VI. ‘HAVELOK THE DANE' 

The poetic romance from which this selection is taken is fotmd in Laud 
MS. 1 08 of the Bodleian, Oxford. It was edited by Madden for the Roxburghe 
Club (1828) ; by Skeat for the Early English Text Society, Ex. Ser. 4 (1868), 
and re-edited for the Clarendon Press (1902) ; and by Holthausen in the 
Moxsbach-Holthausen series of Old and Middle English texts (1901 ). A selection 
appears in Wiilker (‘Lesebuch,' I, 80), and Morris (‘Specimens/ 1 , 222). The 
date of the poem is about 1300 (see Skeat's introdnction for full discussion), 
and the dialect is probably that of Lincolnshire of that time, that is, NEMl. 
This original dialect, however, has been somewhat modified by different 
scribes, as so often in the case of popular poems. The metre is the rimed 
coaplet, regularly of four stresses. 

The complete poem consists of 3001 lines, and the story is as follows. 
An, English king Athelwold had a daughter Goldborough, whom h® entrusted 
at his death to the care of Earl 'Godridi of Cornwall, charging him to marry 
her to the fairest and strongest man he could find, and place the government 
of England in her hands. The Earl, resolving to seize England for his son, 
imprisoned Goldborough in the castle of Dover. Then our selection takes up 
the hero Havelok. To finish the tale, Havelok assisted Grim^ in his trade as 
a fisherman at Grimsby. \Vh*en a famine came he left his foster-father, 
walked to Lincoln, and took service as a scullion to the Earl of Comwall’s 
cook. One day, at some games, Havelok showed his great strength, and 
Godrich determined to fulfil his oath by marrying Goldborough to the sup- 
posed menial. Havelok at first rebelled, but finally took Goldborough to 
wife and departed for Grimsby. At night, as Grim’s wife had done before, 
Goldborough perceives the, light from Havelok’s mouth, and the royal cross 
on his shoulder. An angejl also tells her of good fortune to come. At the. 
same time Havelok has a dream that he posses^ all Denmark and England. 



^HAVELOK THE DANE* 


m 


They go to Denmark and, with many adventures, Havelok hecomes king 
after Godard is defeated and hanged. He invades England, Godrich is made 
prisoner and burnt, and Havelok and Goldborough are crowned at London, 
reigning happily for sixty years. The source of the tale, though clearly 
Teutonic and English in characters and localities, is probably an OF. poem 
now lost, but the ancestor also of the OF. ‘ Lai d’Havelok,’ as of the stories 
in Gaimar’s ‘ Estorie des Angleis,’ and in Manning’s translation of Peter 
Langtoft’s ‘ Chronicle.* For further particulars see the bibliography in Skeat's 
edition of 1902. 

Peculiarities of orthography, it is believed, will no longer trouble the 
student. Some Nth. and some Sth. forms occur, as indicated in notes and foot- 
notes. For the first time y is used for initial ^ (OE. as usually printed) , while 
chit hi (MS. cih^ tli) are employed for OE. ht, ME. That this th does 
not mean OE, would be clear from the scribe’s using it for t in such words 
as nth — utj * out.' 

Page 75, 1. 1. In pat time. The time of the earlier part of the story 
when Goldborough was placed in charge of Godrich. The line preceding 

'Sa(y) we non iorlh in ure (hure) spelle.* 

2. Ignd, MS. Ion. Note omission of final d here, in^o/dQ.. 19), and in and 
(1. 21). 6. fayer, MS. fayr. The word is disyllabic for metre. Morris and 

Skeat both add something to the line, but unnecessarily. 16-17. wilde . . . 
filde, MS. wolde . . . fulde. If the first MS. form is correct, /ulde as a Ml. 
form must Tepresent_/^//(?<a?I? (OE. fuUode), It seems more probable^ fulde 
fiilde , IsW. filde, in which case the true Ml. rime must be wilde. This 
would either be for willede (OE. willode), or better a new form on the basis 
ciwilleifi), such as occurs in * Cursor Mundi.' The latter seems to settle all 
difficulties. 23. rgpe, MS. rede. The MS. form makes no rime, but the 
ON. form of Ml. rSdeifi) is rdda, ME. rglSe, and makes perfect rime. Cf. 86, 
9-10. 26. hosl6d. Besides ME. hUsh{n), howslein), a shortened form 

occurs with 0 u, 27. and for Mm gyven. For explanation cf, the 
statement at the death of Athelwold (1. 218) ; 

* He made his quiste swipe wel. 

And sone gaf it evere ilk del.' 

He not only made his bequest but gave over his property as well. 

Page 76, 1. 9. Was pe trewest. Zupitza, ‘Anglia,’ I, 468, proposes, 
quite unnecessarily, the change of Pat to as. JVende here takes the accusative 
directly, as sometimes in OE. usage. 22. eld©, MS. held©. The addition 
of h initially is common in wprds beginning with a vowel ; cf. hgld for gld 
(77, 20). 25-26. ringes . . . singes. Both Nth. present indie. 3rd sing. 

Men is the weak indefinite form of man ; cf. 84, 27. 

Page 77, 11. 8-4. war© . . . sara. An example of Nth, forms which have, 
been allowed to remain. The ML forms appear in i7”tS, as one of them 
exists in the MS. were . . . sore. 6. Jesu Crist. Hollhausen says a mistake 
for God, and he even proposes a new line, in spite of 78, 7 and frequent other 
references of the same sort, as at 149, 9, All these are based on John i. 3, 
and the usual interpretation of ‘word’ as Christ. Cf. the use of that passage 
in Tatian’s * Diatessaron,’ and Milton’s ‘ Paradise Lost,' VII, 139. ^ Codes sone 
(1. 10) does not interfere with this interpretation, since the two lines express 

T 



274 


/. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


the ordinary prayer for the dead, and the inconsistency is 
18-14. heir . . . tober. Such a rime is certainly suspicions, and Holthausen 
assumes an omission of two lines. On the other hand, the sense is compete, 
and a form Mr from Mzr (cf. Behrens, ‘Franzosische Sprache in pgland, 
p. i4T,for similar forms) may be assumed, 

Pressed syllable. 13* Havelok. The name has been traced to OE. Amaj 
(ON. O^f) throTigh Irisli Amlaib, Welsh Ahloc, Kii. A^eUk {Hamlok). 
kis Anlif was Olaf Sitricson, called Cuar^ ‘ of the sandal. 14 Bw^- 
borow . . . Helfled. These names seem thoroughly English. The first may 
be OE. S'wan, ‘ swan,’ or swan^ ‘ 

and OE. burh^ also found in Coldborough (1. 284). Helfled is doubtless 
Eim WS. rifled, 22. yaf a note. Cf. the expression at /9 5. 
25-26. sikerlike . . . swike. With the short form of the ending -like cf. the 
same rime at 84, 5-6* 

Page 78, 1. 3. pat aod himselve. ‘ On which f>at ... on) God himself 
ran (with) blood.’ For the use of hlode without a preposition cf. the similar 
expression 'wet with tears,’ at 28, 32. 23. grette. Note the 

clear indication in the rime of the shortening of OE. grette. 24. Wat is 
yu. Cf. the indirect form of the same question at 36, 19. 


Page 79, 1. 1. nis it ng corn. 'Is there no com?’ Note use of the 
expletive Mt,’ as in OE. syntax. 29. wepne, MS. wepne bare. The 
latter is no doubt repeated from 1. 27 above, but quite unnecessarily. 


Page 80, 1* 6. Of Jjo sell. Note the plnral ' children ’ without distinctive 
genitive ending. 11. And poucte. Napier proposed to reRd^ouk, ‘never- 
theless,’ instead of }>ou€ie, and Holthausen accepts. It may be easily read as 
it stands, except that noiiht (1. 13) must be assumed to have intruded from 
the preceding line; ‘And thought, he would that he [Havelok] were dead, 
except that he would not kill him with his [own] hand, the foul fiend.' 
The MS. btU on here and at 1. 962 of the poem Skeat has properly explained 
as OE. huton. 


Page 81, 1. 10. prinne, MS. perinne. The shorter form is required for 
the rime here and perhaps at 85, 7* 21* And sipen. Holthausen assumes 

the loss of two lines to say that Grim put the gag in Havelok’s mouth. This 
is not necessary, as in . . . mounden with the next two lines are quite explicit 
enough as to urhat was done. If any emendation is to be made 1 suggest that 
mutk might he added after sifen in, 26. Hwan po swike. Most editors 
have assumed that hwan was incorrect, perhaps repeated from the line above, 
and have altered it to pan (Morris) or as (Holthausen and Skeat). It is 
possible, however, to consider this as a second subordinate clause to Sone he 
caste (1. 31). L. 25 merely emphasizes the action begun in 1. 20, before taking 
xrp the next one. The last word of the line is also an emendation of the 
MS. hefede^ Morris reads him gan beds, omitting kavede entirely. Holthausen 
and Skeat change the line to As }e swike him bad heyede^ but this seems to 
anticipate the action in 11. 30-32. Zupitza’s explanation of as i}ede^ 

based on OE. is highly improbable if not quite impossible. The punctua- 
tion will make the passage clear. 


. Page 82, 1. 2. Iifve. The word rimes with open f words, but this does 



^TiAVELOK THE DANE 


275 

not especially assist in its etymology. 4. A1 sp thou. Holthansen, fol- 
lowed by Skeat, alters to 

‘ Also thou wilt mi lif save (non save)/ 
but it seems to me the slight emendation of mF to vie is sufficient. Grim 
commands his wife to watch Havelok as she values her own life, and then 
explains the rewards to follow. 11. so harde adoun . . . crakede hise 
croune. The change, suggested by Morris, is unquestionably right, final 
e in crou7ie not being pronounced. 16. pat him. Prof. Browne (‘Mod. 
Lang. Notes,’ VII, 134) makes the lament end with 1, 18, at the same time 
suggesting the change of ‘ injure/ to n^re^ ‘ save, deliver/ No emenda- 
tion is necessary, however, as Havelok laments not only that he is a king's 
son, but that wild beasts do not have him rather than such inhuman peopTci, 
Holthausen makes him refer to Grim, but surely this is impossible. The 
peculiarity seems to be that the last part is quoted indirectly rather than in 
the first person. 31. blawe. Another Nth. form, equivalent to ML hlowe. 

Page 83, 1. 10. Bis up, MS. sir up. Morris’s change is obviously right 
and generally accepted. 17. kynemark. As Goldborough sees it, this is 
later described tl. 1262) as follows : 

* On his shuldre, of gold red 
She saw a swi]>e noble croiz. 

Page 85, 1. 14. Denemarkea stiward, MS. deuemark a stiward. It 
seems clear that Godard is not a stiward^ but the stiward^ appointed by the 
king above all others. Instead of inserting ^j^before Deneptiark (Holthausen), 
I prefer to think the genitive s has been lost in the initial of stiward. 

Page 86, 1. 9. “Wat shal me. ‘What shall (be) to me for counsel.* So in 
1. 1 18 of the poem. 18. shep . . . nft. The MS. shej>, net^ hors, swin, might 
all be plurals without ending, as they are all OE. neuters. But they are more 
likely general singulars, as are the descriptive words wolle, horn, b^rd. For 
this reason the omitted word ggt, not g^t iglit\ the mutated plural (Skeat, 
Holthausen), is adopted, 21. And al he. ‘And he drew all to the 
penny,’ i, e. obtained money instead of barter for his possessions. 

Page 87, 1. 4. »§. This word, with open f in OE. dialects, invariably 
limes close in Havelok ; cf. Ten Brink, ‘ Chaucers Sprache,’ § 24 a, 
15, si]?e, MS. jjrie. The MS. reading is meaningless, and some change 
must be made. I repeat si^e from si]>en (1. 11) ; Holthausen and Skeat read 
yete, ‘ yet.* 24-25. frde , . . erpe. The MS, erfe in both lines is impossible, 
and the change of the first to ^rde is probably the best that can be made, 
30. Grimesbi it calle, MS. calleth alle. The change is Zupitza’s and is 
generally accepted. 


VII. ROBERT MANNING’S ‘ HANDLVNGE SYNNE’ . 

' THE TALE OF PERS THE USURER 

The ‘ Handlyhge Synne,’ or ‘ Manual of Sins,’ is found in Harleian MS. 1701 
of the British Museum, and Bodleian MS. 415, It was edited by Furaivall for 
the Roxburghe Club (1802) and has appeared in a new edition for the Early 
English Text Society. A selection occurs in Morris (‘Specimens/ II, 50). 
Onx selection is from the Harleian MS. as edited by FurnivaU, and includ^ 



276 /. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 

lines 5555 to 5946. The anthor, Robert Manning, was born at Bmnne or 
Bourn near Market Deeping in Lincolnshire about 1260, and died about 134*^* 
In 1303, while living at Bnmwake in the hundred of Kesteven, he translated 
this work, as he tells us in the prologue. The language therefore represents 
NEMl. of the early fourteenth century. ^ ^ 

Manning’s work is translated from the French ‘ Manuel des Pechiez of 
William of Waddington. It treats the seven deadly sins and seven sacraments, 
the twelve requisites of a good confession, and the twelve graces resulting 
therefrom. In illustration of various points such tales as this of Pers are intro- 
duced. In this case, as usually, the translation follows the OF. tale with 
slight variations. The metre, as so commonly at this time, is the rimed 
couplet of four stresses. 

Like the last selection, the language of this contains some Nth. forms. The 
use of y, long and short, for i is exceedingly common. An occasional Nth. ei 
{ey) represent Ml. Nth. an orthographic peculiarity which also grows more 
frequent. Final e is more generally lost in pronunciation than in previous 
selections, but is often written where it must have been silent, and even added 
where it never belonged historically. It is probably silent at the end of the 
line in most cases. A medial e which is necessary for the metre has often been 
omitted. Among consonants gh appears for ^ before /, as in MnE. spelling. 
Some of these are no doubt connected with the fact that the MS, is later than 
the time of 'Manning, that is about 1360. 

Page 88, 1. 1. kauersyns. Though used as a general name, as in OF., 
the word was originally more specific, since it is derived from the Provence 
town of Cahors, early noted for its usurers. Dante (‘Inferno,’ XI, 50) con- 
nects Cahors with Sodom, and Matthew of Paris has a chapter near the begin- 
ning of his ‘ History ’ on the extortions of these usurers. The word kauersin 
has been generally missed by the dictionaries, or wrongly glossed as ‘ hypo- 
crite.’ 2. wykked. Note how early ME. wikke has assumed excrescent 
d after the analogy of adjectives and participles ending in ed, 5 . nat. This 
is probably a retention of OE. nahf, rather than an early unrounding of 0 in 
nokt. 18. Pers. Here, and often elsewhere, to be read as a disyllable. 
Perhaps we should print Peres (cf. pe^ts^ okerers « penes, okereres, 11. 25, 26), 
but I have preferred to leave the MS. forms with this note. 21. Seynt 
Jgne. This St. John, the Almoner, was patriarch of Alexandria in the seventh 
century. 

Page 89, 1. 2, sate. Evidently a Nth. form if the vowel is long, or 
possibly a new formation on the basis of the singular. 7-8. weyl . . . deyl. 
Examples of the Nth. use of ei (ey) for e, 25. bgde Jje qufde. ‘Awaited 
the evil (man).’ 

Page 90, 1. 1. Pers stode. Cf. 85, 27-28, thought by Skeat to have 
suggested this passage. It was probably a rather common expression in one 
forrn or another at the time. 5-6. Ipfe . . . drgfe. A good example of the 
addition of final e where it could not have been pronounced, a practice 
increasingly common in later Middle English. 22. fyl. A shortened pre- 
terit of fallen ~fe/j with e become i (y), 24. Hym poghte. Note the 

confusion which has already taken place between ME. pu^te and po^te, 
80. abashed as amad, MS. as mad. Morris suggested a mad, ‘a maid,’ but 
the correct form is the shortened pp, of amceden, OE. gemddan. 



ROBERT MANNING'S * HANDLYNGE SYNAE ' 277 


, Page 91, 1. 28. now If res. ^ Now thou shalt learn how this loaf 
shall help you at need, (and how) to inaprove thy soul with alms-deeds.’ Note 
the present 3rd sing, in -es and side by side. 

Page 92, 11. 29-30. herto . . . smert. Another indication of the loss of 
final e from the spoken language of this region ; cf. also breyde . . . seyd (93, 

31-32). 

Fags 93, 1. 14. And a party. ‘ And began in part, or in some measure, 
to leave off.’ 

Page 94, 1. 31. Hys clerk waa wf. In OE. syntax clerk would require 
a dat. after was^ but the loss of distinctive ending for that case made a noun 
in such position seem the subject, and this syntax has prevailed in MnE, 
usage.* 

Page 96, 1. 10. To whom. Note the clear use of whom as a relative. 
17. 3^1®* etymology is uncertain, but I have assumed its connexion with 
ON. joli OE. geol^ ‘ ytile/ still found in MnE. Vuie. 

Page 96, 1. 7. Plenerly alle pat. Cf. Havelok, 11. 819-20 : 

* A1 pat he perfore tok 
'Withheld he nouht (nouth) a ferpinges nok.’ 

From some such resemblances between the twm poems it is believed that Man- 
ning may have known the Havelok, another Lincolnshire work. 

Page 98, 1. 19. stonte^stfudep. The contracted form is less common 
in Ml. and Nth. than in Sth. English. 25. 5one. The OM. demonstrative 
WS. which is only dialectal in MnE., though the root occurs in yonder ^ 
OM, *%onre. 

Page 89, 1. 13. squyler. Though OF. in immediate relation to English, 
it is based on a Teutonic root which appears in MnE. swill, OE. swilian, *to 
wash,' as at 96, 24. 23. A flamme of fyra, A frequent attendant of super- 

natural manifestations, and probably connected in the mecliseval mind with the 
Pentecostal fire, Acts ii. 3. Havelok is known to be of royal birth by a similar 
token (83, 1-7). 


VIII. THE WEST MIDLAND PROSE PSALTER 

‘ The translation of the Psalms from which our selectibn is taken is found in 
Additional MS. 17,375 of the British Museum and in MS. A 4, 4 of Trinity 
College, Dublin. On the basis of the former it has been edited from both 
IkISS. by Karl Bulbring (Part I, EETS., 97), and Bulbring has been followed 
here. The language is almost pure West Midland, and belongs to the first 
'half of the fourteenth century. This ^ Psalter ’ was formerly attributed to 
William of Shoreham, with whose poems it occurs in the MS., but such 
authorship is impossible, as Shoreham’s poems are Kentish and there is no trace 
of Kentish in this version ; cf. Konrath, ‘ Beitrage znr Erkliirung 11. Textkritik 
,des William von Shoreham’ (187S). A WMl. selection is added to 'show how 
closely that dialect agreed with EMI. in most particulars. 



L THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


S78 


This * Psalter^ is a close, though sometimes mistaken rendering of the Latin 
text, presnmahiy the Italic version of the Scriptures. Some interesting 
examples of mediaeval rendering and interpretation are given in the notes. 
For these and other peculiarities it may be compared with Hampoles earlier 
Nth, version (ed. by Bramley, 1884), with the Wiclifite version (ed by 
Forshall and Madden). It will be seen that the verse division is not quite 
same as in our modem Bible, but the original numbering of the Psalms has 
been made to correspond with our own. ^ 

As already stated in the Grammatical Introduction the W est Midland doM 
not differ materially from East Midland, and this is especially true of the 
present selection, in its phonology. As to orthography, we may note ^ lor 

S in OF. words; — kk {wickedy 100, 23% sc for ss {blesced, 100, I5)» i-he 
one striking peculiarity of inflexion is the use of -and{e) in the present 
participle. Rarely, too, is ^ es appears in the plural of nouns. 


Page 100, 1. 16. sin5fres. The word is based on the root of OE. 
- syngiciiZy not the sb. symic'y but note the variants, st^iiii^vs (1. 23), sy fluff's 
n. 25). 19. fmt. The OF, diphthong ni is usually preser\'ed in stressed 

syllables, but other cases of its appearance as simple « (= iu) are well known. 
20. fallwen, MS. fallen with w in later hand. As the Lat. is dejiuit it xs 
not impossible that the translator thoughtj^//(?w, ^ fall, fail, pass away,' a good 
rendering. 22. as a pdudre. The connective has been omitted ; cf. the 
Lat. sediamqttam, 24. Sure Iigrd knew. The translator has taken Lat. 
furvit for a preterit, as in other places (103, 12 ; 104, lo). On the other hand, 
co^i&idt is translated knoweji at 105, 2. 


Pago 101, 1. 2. water of fyllyng. Lat. aquam re/eciioms, and Pub. 
MS. water of fulfillyng ; MnE. Bible, still waters. No doubt fyllyng is used 
in the sense of * fulfilling, restoring,' and is thus a good rendering of refeciio, 
3, he turned . . . fram fende. The Lat. is af}imam mea^n convertity and 
the addition is probably due to some commentator. 4. For ^if Jjat ioh 
have g^n. Lat. nam etsi ambulaverOy and the translator has mistaken the fut. 
perf. for the perf., or had a different text before him. 8. pou makest fatt. 
A literal rendering of the V ulg. Impinguasti in oho caput viettm. 15. innocent 
in h^nde. Lat. innocents nianibus\ Dub. MS. clezte of hondes and clem of 
hert. 19. p© sechand hym. The translator uses the English participle 
exactly as the Latin : Haec est generatio quaerentium eum, quaerentiuznfaciem 
Dei lacob. 20. princes of hell©. Of helle here and ofhevene in verse 9 are 
additions to the original in accordance with mediseval interpretation,^ as referring 
to Christ when ‘harrowing hell,' and later ascending to heaven. This is based 
on the apocrj’phal ‘ Gospel of Nicodemus,’ which was closely followed in 
English versions of the 'harrowing of hell' story. 


Pag© 102, 1 . 9. wh^© up snow©. The Lat. reads supernivem deaU 
babory and the translator has not perceived that super means ‘ beyond, more 
than,' not ‘up,* 29. fram p© world. A good example of the OE., ME. 

use of world in sense of time, as in world without end. 

Page 103, 1. 2. p© k§pyng 6 ny^t. ^ And the watching {kepynf) at 
night that avails not {for nou^t ben had) shall be their years * ; Lat. Custodia 
in noctCy quae pro nihilo habtntury eorum anni enint. Our modem version is 
based on a different text. 9. pencken as pe lob. Lat. anni mstri sicud 



THE WEST MIDLAND PROSE PSALTER 


279 


c^mneit meditabtmtur^ and the verb has been translated ]>eHchen, ^ think/ not 
fincken^ ^seem/ This is natural since meditor properly meant *to think/ and 
only in mediseval times acquired the passive sense ‘to seem.’ in ]?e 
seventi 5 ere. The Lat. dies a^inorum nostrorum in ipsis^ septuaginta anni 
e\ddently puzzled the translator. He has left in ipsis untranslated and the 
syntax of the phrase is not clear. 10. pe mpre pver hem. * The more 
(years) beyond, or in addition to them/ another slavish rendering; cf. Lat. 
amplius eorum, 14 . be pou turned. Untd ndu perhaps translates usque 
of the Vulgate with possibly some other word. ‘ Be thou turned until now/ 
though not clear, seems to be the meaning. 19 . dresce her sones. ‘ Direct 
their sons/ translating literally Lat. dirige Jilios eorum. So the first part of the 
verse Iransliltes Respice in servos tuos et in opera tua, where the modern version 
has a different reading. 25 . trappes of pe fendes. Lat. de laqueo venan- 
Hum, the latter being interpreted as ‘devils,’ according to the commentary 
attributed to Jerome, ‘ Breviarium in Psalmos ’ (Migne’s ‘ Jerome/ VII). See 
my article on ‘ Some of Chaucer’s Lines on the Monk/ ‘ Modern Philology,’ I, 
105. asper word. Lat. verbo aspero, where our version has ‘noisome 
pestilence,’ a different reading. 29 . temptacioun waxand. Lat. a sagiita 
voiantOf familiar in our ‘ arrow that flieth.’ With the application of the whole 
passage to man’s contest with the devil, sagiita has been understood in the 
figmative sense of temptation.’ 30 . fram pe curs. There are various 
readings of the original, as often. The Vulgate has ab incursu et daemonio 
meridiano, the last words being regarded as a reference to Lucifer. pousand 
temptaoioTns. Lat. merely cadent . . . mille,, and the translator assumes a 
connexion with the preceding and adds iempiactouns implied in Pe ciirs» 

Page 104 , L 1. p© devel. The translator refers the subject of the verb, 
unexpressed in Latin, back to fende in verse 6. 17. pe which. The earliest 

use in our selections of this compound relative ; cf. * Chaucers Sprache,* § 254. 
21. is doand. A translation of Lat. 28 . streinped. The MS. is 

not clear, but seems to have been corrected to read as in the text. 

Page 105 , 1 . 2. faintes. The Vulgate reads Jigmentum, 3 . pat w§. 
The OE. Vespasian text reads quod pulvis sumus, not qtmiiam as the Vnlgate, 
‘and the former was probably before our translator. 


IX. ‘THE EARL OF TOULOUSE' 

This poetic romance is found in four MSS., Cambridge Ff IT, 38; 
Ashmole 45 and 61 of the Bodleian Library ; and Thornton MS. A 5 of Lincoln 
Cathedral Librar5^ The first of these, represented in our selection also, was 
edited by Ritson, ‘Ancient English Metrical Romances/ III, 93 (1802, revised 
by Goldsmid, and a so-called critical edition from all the MSS. was 

made by Liidtke for Zupitza’s ‘ Sammlung englischer Denkmaler ’ in i88x. The 
poena was composed in the NEMl. district about the middle of the fourteenth 
century, although the MS. belongs to the fifteenth century, and therefore shows 
a later orthography than the time of composition. 

The poem consists of 1,234 verses arranged in twelve-line stanzas, riming 
aedkebddbeeh. The first two verses of each triplet have four stresses, the last 
three stresses. Our selection begins with L 895 and continues to the end. The 



28 o 


/, THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


earlier part tells how* Earl Barnard made war upon the Emperor Diocletian, 
hecanse the latter had deprived him of territory. Earl Barnard was successful, 
and, among other captives, takes Sir Trylabas of Turkey, whom he agrees to 
free if he will obtain for the earl a sight of the beautiful Empress Beulybon 
(Beaulyoun, Beaulilion> Trylabas arranges the meeting in the presence of 
others, Barnard appears as a hermit, and, on leaving, is given by the empress 
some coin and a ring. About the same time two knights are enamoured of the 
empress and, on her refusal to comply with their base wishes, contnve to make 
her appear guilty of adultery, of which they accuse her to the emperor. He 
condemns her to be burned alive, unless, as suggested in ‘ parliament just before 
the opening of our selection, some one shall be found to support her innocence 
in combat with her accusers. The favour which this proposition meets is shown 
by the first line of the passage chosen. The story is believed to have historical 
foundation in the life of the Empress Judith, wife of Louis I (75^8-840). A 
romance based on this historical foundation became widely reproduced in Spam, 
Italy, France and other countries ; see Liidtke’s excellent Introduction, 6 1 f. The 
immediate source of the English poem, the ‘Lay of Bretayne, mentioned in 
the last stanza, is unknown. , ^ . , 

As already noted the orthography is late. For example, cu {(yw) is always 
used for long u, th for earlier J, ghi often for and wh for OE. hw. On tlie 
other hand, uh for sh still prevails. Besides, y is used with great frequency for 
«, both alone and in the diphthongs ai, ei, and occasionally for e in unstressed 
syllables. The doubling of long vowels is also common. 

Page 105, 1. 18. h§ spake. Tlie ‘olde knyght’ who had proposed the 
trial by combat to decide the guilt of the empress. 24. be sff and be 
£giide. An alliterative expression for the whole world, quite common in 
Middle English ; cf. 161, 25. 

Page 106, 1. 14. can - gan. This weak form with voiceless initial is 
more common in Nth. English. 

Page 107, 1. 4. S9 mote thou the. 'So may thou prosper,’ that is, ‘ as 
you hope to prosper.’ 27, make a vowe. The last two words represent 
OF. avou, ‘ vow,’ but they became separated so as to suggest ‘a vow * as here. 
We still say make avowal 3 and an avowal ^ 

Page 108, 1. 24. mas. Another form which suggests the Nth. dialect or 
a district near it. '29. When the abbot. The shortness of the verse suggests 
an omission, as of did after abbot', cf. Ashmole MS. 45. 

Page 109, 1. 23. durre, MS. dar. Liidtke reads dare as a disyllable, 
but surely that is not a likely form. One MS, reads durste, but I assume 
a subjunctive form as more probable. 

Page 112, 1. 22. Manly.* One MS. reads manfully ^ which shows the 
content of the word. 

page 114, 1, 9. Soche wordes. ‘I advise [that] thou sbouldest alter 
such words.’ Wpnde is subjunctive preterit of desire, from wTiide{n). Note 
the preterit in a clause of unreality; cf. Introd* § 207. 10. Anpne in 

hfiste. Note the absence of the verb in the clause as representing the abrupt 
mariner of address. 



^ THE EARL OF TOULOUSE 


281 


Page 116 , 1 . 4. chyldyr fyftene. So Havelok and Goldborongh have 
fifteen children, all kings and queens. 7-8. geste cronyclyd is , . . callyd 
y wis. Some change is necessary, as shown by foptnoto readings, and I have 
adopted that of Ludtke, 


Xi GILD OF THE HOLY TRINITY AND OF SAINT WILLIAM 
OF NORWICH 

This selection is from a MS. in the Public Record Office, London, Bundle 
CCCX 1 16, as edited by Lucy Toulmin Smith in ‘ English Gilds ’ (EETS., 40), 
p. 29. The ‘Return’ was made in January 1389, and the language is the 
East Midland of Norfolk, the descendant of East Anglian of Old English times. 

These ‘ Returns’ concerning the gilds had been ordered by a Parliament 
held at Canterbury in 1388. The extract is an account of the formation of the 
gild and the statutes under which the brotherhood was constituted. It is 
preceded in the MS. by a recital, in Latin, of the king’s writ to the sheriff of 
Norfolk, and followed by two Latin sentences saying that no other statute had 
been established, and that the property of the gild consisted of four pounds, 
four shillings, ‘et non plus nec minus.’ The whole is endorsed <Fratemitas 
Sancte Trinitatis ac beati Willelmi Tnnocentis et martiris in Norwico.’ It is 
similar to other ‘ Returns,’ and is chosen as a prose piece of sufficient length to 
represent one part of the EMI. dialect. 

Few peculiarities of language need be mentioned. Th now interchanges 
with written with open top and resembling y. • Qw = OE. kw occurs as in 
Ml. occasionally (cf. * Genesis and Exodus’), in Nth. commonly. For a special 
treatment of the language see Schultz, ‘Die Sprache der English Gilds’ (1891). 

Page 116 , 1 . 13 . In pe name. This is- immediately preceded by the 
Latin word Comiittiiiones, 15 . Seynt William. For the account of his 
martyrdom see the passage in the ‘Chronicle* at 4 , 28. Note the modem 
form of the name as compared with Willelm of the ‘ Chronicle.* 18 . gylde. 
The form of this word with initial guttural stop is not English, since OM. g?ld^ 
W^S. guldf became Ml. ^eld^ Sth. ^ild or ^tld respectively, and the Ml. form 
would have become MnE. yields cf. the corresponding verb, the sb. yield 
applied to crops, and Chaucer’s QASS. yeldehalle, yeldhalki ^eldehall^ 

' ^ildehalle). The ME. form with guttural stop must therefore show external 
influence, probably that of ON. gildii cf. MDu. ghilde, 20. systeren. 
Note the extension of the OE. weak plural ending under the influence of 
constant association with hretheren. 21. upen here power. * According 
to their power, or ability.’ This meaning does not seem to belong to OE. uppan^ 
but is easily derived from it. 23 . pe ffst of Seynt Peter and Powel. 
That is June 29. The Sunday after is then the gyldcday of 117 , 21 f. 

Page 117 , 1 , 2. to. This form of OE. iwd^ ME. iwU, but with loss of v)^ 
is exactly parallel to eg from OE. swa^ though I have assumed close 0 in fd 
owing to a later disappearance of w, 14 . p§ aldermannes wyl. The 
alderman, a master or president of the gild, was regularly chosen each year on 
the gildday, -as indicated at 1 . 30. Other ‘ Returns * speak of wardens who 
have charge of the property. 15 . at p© cumpapy. Note the genitive 



282 


I. THE MIDLAND DIALECT 


witliout ending, no doubt as the last word of tbe clause. 18. save pe 
kynge liys ryhte. ‘ Preserv’e (save) to the king his right,’ probably not 
«Preser\-e the king’s right.’ 27. any. The MS. ony may indicate pny, but 
the prevailing short a seems to show that this 0 is sliort also. leyn it 
ddun. Dependent upon schal above, which would be repeated in MnE. usage. 

Pago 118, 1. 7. But if it be. The gild laid great stress upon character, 
and every member was in some sense responsible for every other. 24. at 
liore comoun coat. * At the cost of them all, or in common ’j cf. Chaucer s 
well-known at our aller cost, Prol. to ‘ Cant. Tales,’ I, 799 . 


XI. JOHN MYRC’S INSTRUCTIONS FOR PARISH PRIESTS’ 

These ‘Instructions’ are preserved in three MSS., Cotton Claudius A in 
the British Museum, and Douce MSS. 60,103 in the Bodleian, The first 
and best was edited by Peacock for the Early English Text ^ciety, 31 
(1868), and from this have been selected 11 . 1-76 and 234-371. The writer 
was a canon of Lilleshall, Shropshire, and is supposed to have written the 
work about 1400. The extract therefore repiesents WMl. of that time, though 
the MS. is of the early fifteenth century. , * . 

The title gives a good idea of the general character of the work. A note 
at the end tells us that it was translated from Latin, but its source is not 
definitely known. It is similar to many other mediaeval treatises, the prior 
of hlirc’s own house having written a more complete * Manuale Sacerdotis.’ 

The language will present few difficulties after the previous selections have 
been read. We meet for the first time uy for OE. J?, Ml. J (f), Sth. 2”. 

Paga 119 , 1 - 10 . dawe. Really a new singular based on the plural 
dawes, OE. dagos, and preserved in only a few phrases. 11. both. Note 
the Sib. plural of the verb, as occasionally ; cf. the ML pluralsyh://i?» (L 8), 
sen (1. 9), fdren (1. 10). 

Page 120 , 1 . 14. serve God to pay. ‘Serve God to his pleasure.’ 
23. Cuttede clothes and pyked schone. For the fiist we should say 
‘ slashed,’ that is, with long narrow openings to show the rich lining beneath. 
The shoes called pyked were long and pointed ones, used first in the reign 
of William Rufus, and often prohibited to the clergy by local cotmcils. 
27 . honest olpthes. Note the old meaning of honest, ‘ honourable, suitable, 
according to law and custom.’ 28. Baselard. A short sword much worn 
in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, but not allowed to priests. They 
often failed to obey the prohibition, as ^own by the following lines quoted 
by Peacock from the ‘Plowman’s Tale’ ; 

‘ Bucklers brode and swerdes long 
Baudrike with haselardes kene, 

Such toles about her necke they hong: 

With Antichrist soche priestes been,* 

Cf. also ‘Piers Plowman,’ IIIB, 303. SO. thy ordere* Mire’s order was 
a branch of the canons regular of St. Austin, taking its name from the city of 
Arras, where they were first established. The branch had been transplamjed 
to 'England by Richard de Belineis about 1145 . 



JOHN MYRC'S ‘ INSTRUCTIONS FOR PARISH PRIESTS ’ 283 


Page 121, 1. 25. AIS9 thow. The passage omitted relates to shriving of 
women, marriage and childbirth, and is of less general interest than that which 
follows. 30. ischryve. The retention of the OE. prefix ge as i is dis- 
tinctly Sth , and is probably here indicative of Sth. influence, though it 
occasionally occurs in Ml., when it cannot certainly be attributed to Sth. 
influence. 32. asterday. A natural shortening of OE. easUrdeegy but 
usually resisted by the influence of the uncompounded easier y * Easter,* so that 
the two agree in MnE. 

Page 122, 1. 10. but wyn and water. Peacock says : ' After commu- 
nion it was the custom for the laity to drink unconsecrated wine, to assist 
them in swallowing the eucharistic w'afer.’ At this tme it was not customary 
to give the cup to the laity. 32. Knelynge doun. Peacock notes this 
as evidence that there were no pews or benches in the churches. 

Page 123, 1. 11. the belle. The so-called sanctus bell {sance-y sauce- 
bell) hung in mediseval churches, says Peacock, on the east gable of the nave 
outside the church. It was rung to permit those not present to Join in the 
devotion. A hand-bell was also sometimes used, as to-day in Catholic 
churches. All these were ordered to *be utterly defaced, rent and abolished* 
in 1576. 

Page 124, 1. 10. As Seynt Austyn. Peacock says not in St. Augustine*s 
writings, though possibly in some work once attributed to him. 25. seyut- 
wary. The reading of Douce MSS. chirchhay, * churchyard,* restores the 
rime, and is no doubt correct. In explanation of the MS. reading Peacock 
says : * In mediaeval documents belonging to this countiy {England) sanctua" 
rium and its equivalents in English almost always mean churchyard.’ As 
bearing this out cf. seyniwary (125, 2), where the Douce MSS. have chyreh- 
yerdy very likely the correct sense here also. 27. Sgnge and cr^. Peacock 

mentions that the Douce MS. 103 has a note in a somewhat later hand, which 
reads : * danseynge, cotteyng, boll}'ng, tenessyng, handball, football, stoilball, 
and all manner other games out cherchyerd.* 29. Oastynge of axtre. The 
axletree was sometimes used instead of the bar or the stone; cf. Strutt’s 
Sports and Pastimes of the Middle Ages,^ p. 140. 31. Bal and bares. 
The former may be one of several games of ball. The latter is Base or Bars, 
or Prisoner’s bars, the name being due to the practice of staking out the * base.’ 
Cf, for both Strutt, as above. 

Page 125, 1. 1. Oourte h^ldynge. Peacock notes that the use of 
churches and churchyards for secular purposes was not uncommon, citing local 
histories for particular instances. 14. Every mon. No doubt Iche^ occur- 
ring in one of the Douce MSS., is the con-ect reading. 23. Wycheoraffee, 
In the service of excommunication, given in Douce MS. 60, reference is 
especially made to witchcraft. telynge. Cf. 'Ancren Riwle’ (ed. 
Morton), p. 208 : * Sigaldren and false teolunges, levUnge on ott and of 
swefiies, and alle wicchecreftes . . . nis hit })e spece of prude ])et ich cleopcde 
presumciun?’ Telynge is connected with OE. tiliany * to strive, labour,’ and 
may be equivalent to ME. experimmty * sorcery,* as in a passage in Douce 
MS. 60 : * All J>at maken^ experimentes or widicrafte or charmes.* Cf- also 
146, II. 



PART II 


THE DIALECTS OF THE NORTH, THE SOUTH, 
AND THE CITY OF LONDON 

This Part is designed to illustrate the Northern and Southern dialects, and 
lx)ndon English as it gradually changed from Southern to Midland. Northern 
is placed first, as most closely allied to Midland, and examples are here given 
of Northern English in the more distinctive sense, as well as of Middle Scotch 
which is based upon it. As there are few available selections until the end 
of the thirteenth century, no division of 'Early’ Northern need be made. 


I.. PROLOGUE TO THE ^CURSOR MUNDI^ 

The ' Cursor Mundi ’ is preserved in various MSS., of which Hupe (EETS., 
99, p. 62*; loi, p. 1 13*) describes no less than ten. Four of these, Cotton 
Vesp. A III of the British Museum, Fairfax 14 of the Bodleian, Gottingen 
• MS. Theol. 107 r at the University of Gottingen, and Trinity College MS. 
R3, 8 at Cambridge, were edited by Morris for the ' Early English Text 
Society’ (57, 59, 63, 66, 68, 99, 101), The purest of these completer te.xts is 
the Cotton above, of which our selection includes lines i to 270. The j^oem 
was written about 1300 (Hupe thinks as early as the last half of the thirteenth 
century) in a region placed by Murray as near Durham, and by Hupe in 
North Lancashire, owing to forms that suggest Ml, influence, as the words 
with g instead of Nth. 5 , OE. a. These indicate that the MS., if not the 
author, belongs to a region affected by the Ml. change. No author is known, 
but Hupe argues for a certain John of Lindberghe, whose name appears in the 
Gottingen MS., though usually assumed to he that of a scribe. 

The 'Cursor Mundi’ is a poetical history of the Hebrew and Christian 
world based on various sources, the Scriptures, the 'Historia Scholnstica' of 
Petrus Comestor, the apociyphal books of the New Testament, and others ; 
see Hsensch’s ' Inquiry into the Sources,’ EETS., 99, p. 1*. Some notes to 
our selection from the ME. 'Genesis and Exodus’ show the common basis of 
the two, but the ' Cursor Mundi ’ is much fuller in all respects. Especially 
are the legendaiy portions interesting, as reflecting the credulous character of 
the mediseval mind. The metre, as will be seen, is the common rimed couplet 
of four stresses. 

As to language, the mixture of Ml. g with Nth. a from OE. d has been 
mentioned. Otherwise the vowel phonology is simple. Among the .pecu- 
liarities of consonants are the use of j in unstressed syllables for OE. rc, as 



PROLOGUE TO fHE ‘CURSOR MUNDI ‘ 285 

Inglis, Ml. Englisch (127, 6) ; suld. Ml. schuld, schold (129, 3) ; sc ^ as 
in scaw (130, i) ; qu for OE. hw^ as sometimes in Ml.; th beside^; ghtiosz 

regularly. 

Page 126,1. 3. Alisaundur. The widespread romances relating to most 
of these heroes are well known, as those of Alexander, Brntns, Arthur, Chari e- 
magne (Charles King, 1. 15), Tristrem (1. 17), Amadas (127, 2). 6. lesis. 

The form is clearly pres, pi., but perhaps we should read /fj, preterit with thou- 
sand as a collective sing. On the other hand, the only pret. form recorded by 
Kellner in his excellent glossary is lest^ ‘ lost.* The pres. pi. could be explained 
as used in vivid narration. 9, sp. Note this among many examples of 
strict Ml. forms, beside those of the North. 13. ’Wawan, Cai. More 

commonly Gaivain^ Kay^ as in Malory's ‘ Morte D'Arthur.* dper 
stabell. * Other brave ones.’ 17. Ysote. Hupe, in his critical text, 
changes to Ysoud, spoiling the rime in both vowel and consonant. With so 
many final ^f's becoming /’s it is not strange that this name should have 
suffered the same alteration. 

Page 127, 1. 1. loneck . . . Tsambrase.' The first Is one of the principal 
characters in the French romance ‘Yonec.’ The second is the subject of 
a romance in ‘Thornton Romances,’ p. 88. 2. Amadase. The romance of 

Sir Amadace is found in Robson’s ‘ Three Metrical Romances,’ Camden Society 
(1842), based on the OF. romance of ‘Idoine and Amadas.’ 6. Inglis. 
The regular Nth. form of the adjective and substantive. Note change of e to / 
before the nasal as in the MnE. form, though we still write E, 10. draws. 
The MS. form draghus is common in the Lancashire dialect {tL'dra^e^ in ‘Sir 
Gawain and the Green Knight,' 1. 1,031), but a monosyllabic form is necessary 
for the metre. 15. scilwis se. Hupe adopts ilk wiis for scilwis, considering 
the latter a mistake for slht/is, but the change is wholly unnecessary. Scilwis 
is used substantively, and the line means ‘ but by the fruit may wise (men) see,* 
26. tas. Both tas and mas for takes and makes are common in Nth. 

Page 128, 1. 7. chaunge of hert. The reading of Gbtt. and Trin. 
MSS., while Fairfax has a different expression, or elks of hert. 9. at 
bS. Note the Nth. use of at with the infinitive for Ml. and Sth, td. ' Modern 
English has a contraction cf the Nth. form in ado ~ to do. 10. Prg Mr 
schalt pdu. The reference is to foly^ vanite of 1. 3. 16. be forwitb 

bedd. The MS. has he hym foi'wit (» forivith)^ but no rime word. The 
other MSS. vary greatly. Xtake hedd as a shortened form of b^d, ‘offered, 
announced, threatened,’ and the meaning of the passage to be, beginning with 
1. 1 3 : * Ere he shall be brought down so violently he knows not whither to 
turn, until his love has led him to such reward as he before announced.* 
17-18. mere . . . were. The other texts have let (lett), ‘ hindrance,’ and 
this, -together with the rime, suggests a noun not recorded for OE. but connected 
with OAng. ?nerran, WS, mierran^ ‘ hinder, mar.’ Mere would thus represent 
OAng. merre^ which occurs in Trin, MS. 24,802. The rime with ivere — 
iverre^ ‘worse,* would then be perfect. Kaluza, in his glossary, translates 
‘ harm, trouble* without explanation. 23. pof. The OE. guttural spirant 
h {£) has become the labio-dental spirant f as in MnE. lau^h^ cough, tough, 
and a f^w others. 32. pe love b^s never g&n. ‘ The love (that shall) be 
never gone/ that is, ‘ shall never perish.’ 



it THE NORTHERN DIALECT 

Page 129, 1. 3. mater take. Mater added by Morris from the other 
MSS. 7. Q,uat bate is, Morris would insert hit, ‘it/ after is, as m Trm, 
MS., but bole may be disyllabic and the line complete. 9. werd, Mb. 
warld. The MS. reading must be a scribal alteration, as shown by the nme 
and the reading of the other MSS. 19. lavedi . . . Ifvedis. Double forms 
of the word appear in two of the four MSS. 

Page 130, 1. 1. scaw. Such a form beside schew (L 5 ) indicates scribal 
alteration or that both forms were found in the dialect of the poet. 10 . have 
in. tale. ‘ Have in tale/ that is, * relate, be able to tell. 21. Oxspring. 
The other MSS. have ospringe (hospring\ indicating that .ar in the w^ord prob- 
ably represents r. 26- Esau. The word is regularly trisyllabic in the 
poem, as in Lat. and OF. 29-30. IVtoyses . . . ehfs. The same rime 
occurs once in ‘ Genesis and Exodus/ though Moyses usually rimes with close 

Page 131, 1. 7. redd yuu. Reddynn of Morris is impossible, and the MS. 
must have been misunderstood. 20. ]>at Jesus did. The account is based 
upon the apocryphal ‘ Childhood of Jesus/ so literally accepted in the middle 
ages. 

Page 132, 1. 6 . fiat. ‘ To whom.’ Without change of form }at is nom. 
dat. or acens., though when dat. or accus. a preposition-adverb often follows the 
verb. 12 . Iiords fete. All the other MSS. have a genitive in es {is). On 
the other hand, the genitive without ending is common in Nth. English. Cf, 
(133, 7). 23. unschill. Morris notes as equivalent to unscill, that 
is, seh = sc, 26. onstad and sey. Hupe reads onstand and sey. But 
a preterit stad appears in rime -with badd, ‘ bade,' at 1 . 5 ? 54 ^> ^ 

participle stad {stadd) in several places. These indicate that onstad is prob- 
ably correct, based on ON. steSJa-staddi. The line means ‘ many a man was 
present and saw.' 31. How our Iifvedi endid. The ‘ assumption ’ of 
the Virgin, believed to have occurred on August 15, and still celebrated in 
some countries. 

Page 133, 1. 4. pe dreri days fiveten. A full account of these days 
occurs in the selection from ‘ Metrical Homilies,' beginning on p- ^ 148. 
7, dure Iifvedi mumaud mode. This theme was often treated by medij^al 
poets, and frequently in English with such titles as ‘ Compassio Mariae,* 
‘Lament of Mary,’ &c. In the ‘Cursor Mundi’ it is found at 1. 23 j945* 
14, er. C£ note on 9, 2. The form preserves the original vowel of the root^ 
which has become a in later English under the influence of r. 23. Into 
Inglis tong. The passage is interesting as showing the national spirit which 
produced a literature for Englishmen, notwithstanding the period of French 
influence following the Conquest, and the dominance of Latin as Ihe language 
of learning. 

Page 134, 11. 13-14. tent . . . amend. The rime was probably perfect 
with t in both words, as final d so often became t in Nth. Cf. the past parties 
pies in et {it) for ed (id) in Burns. 16. Eul il ha p&i, Morris reads ii- 
ha[yi2, ‘ ill luck/ and Hupe follows him. But surely our text is complete and 
makes admirable sense, while with the reading of Morris another verb ^st be 
supplied. 17. sum wd til heild. ‘ As we incline to.’ 18. acountas, 
Mi^armites. The MS', reading seems impossible if the word means * herinits/ 
Acduntes is from Fairfax MS, 



TBE DEATH OF SAINT ANDREW 


2&7 


II. THE DEATH OF SAINT ANDREW 

The story pf Saint Andrew, of which this selection forms a part, belongs to 
the Northern collection of legends found in various MSS. ; see Horstmann, 
' Altenglische Legenden,’ Nene Folge, p. lx. That from which this is taken 
is Harl. 4,196 of the British Museum. Horstmann believed the collection was 
made in the diocese of Durham in the last quarter of the thirteenth century, 
though the MS. is of the fourteenth. The prevalence of Midland forms, how- 
ever, indicates a region nearer the border of the Midland district ; cf. Ret2laff, 
‘ Untersuchungen iiber den nordenglischen Legendencyclus ’ (1S88). The 
collection bears the marks of having been written by a single author, but 
nothing is known of him. 

The legend of St. Andrew first appears in Old English times in the poem 
' Andreas ’ of the eighth century, and in a prose version of the tenth century. 
Both these relate the story of Andrew’s rescue of Matthew, but give no account 
of his death. The latter is told in the ‘ Acts and Martyrdom of Andrew * ; see 
the translation in 'Ante-Nicene Fathers,’ VIII, 51 1. 

Page 135, 1. 1. Saint Andrew. The story of Andrew, the first in the 
collection, is preceded by four introductory couplets, one of which tells us ; 

‘ Out of Latyn pus er pai draune, 

Omang laud men for to be knaune.’ 

3. in sere cuntre. Tradition assigns Andrew’s labours to Scythia, Greece, 
and Thrace, his martyrdom as here related to Petrae in Achaia. 5. £9. 
Note the Ml. form as frequently. jOnly in rimes have these been replaced by 
those of strict Nth. English. 8. Egeas. Called proconsul of Achaia in ‘ Acts 
and Martyrdom of Andrew.’ His wife (143, 7) is called Maximilla. 18. war^ 
laus. Applied to the * fals goddes’ of 1. 10, w'ho were regarded as devils and 
often so called. 

Page 136, 1, 8. pit. An ON. form of the plural demonstrative pronoun. 
9. suth. OE. d shows change to « ~ « (iu) as in Scotch glide , * good.’ In 
this text the change is only partially indicated, and perhaps is due wholly to 
the scribe of the later MS. 23. cros. Kluge (‘ Eng. Etymol.,’ 1898} explains 
this form beside cri^ts, OF. crois, as borrowed from OIr. cross, 29. put, MS. 
putted. The dissyllabic form makes the line too long, and I assume the 
unchanged preterit, occurring in Tib, MS. E VII and often in * Cursor Mundi.’ 

Page 137, 11. 15-16. an© . . . tane. That d is correct in both words is 
shown by the fact that fane = tMen by contraction, and so has a vowel which 
never became ME. p. The MS. fonns with p must therefore be purely scribal 
in origin. 28. tite. This adverb, of ON. origin, is still preserved in MnE. 
tighty with incorrect v/hich has been wrongly supposed to have come from 
; cf. ‘ run as iig/if as you can.’ 

Page 138, 1. 8. voudie it save* Prom this phrase, with object after the 
adjective, has sprung our anomalous compound 19. hend. Note 

this ON^ jdural, used beside the English plural handes. Probably hend was 
associated in the folk mind with mutation plurals like men, 30. he suld 
hftnget. The pronoun necessary to the sense is from Tib. MS. E VH. 
Ilanget is the first in our selections of the common Nth. past participle in et 
(Jf), fosT Ml. Sth. ed (id). 



288 


//. THE NORTHERN DIALECT 


Page 139j 1. 23. and gl^rifide, MS. and ever gloriflde. The reading 
in the text is from Tib. MS. E VII. 

Page 140, 1. 13. To J>e turmentours. Evidently in imitation of the 
taking of Christ’s clothes at the crucifixion. 29. hang. This preterit 
is common in Nth., as in ‘ Cursor Mundi ’ for example. It is probably a modi- 
fication, by analogy of the present, of the^ old reduplicated_ pretent 
Beside this preterit, only the weak past participle ha^t^ed {hdnget) seems to 
occur. 

Page 141, 1. 17. puple. The u of this word is one of the numerous 
forms of OF. ue* The AN. monophthong e has become the standard modern 
form, but pople, pitple and other forms occur in ME. Note also the genitive 
without ending. 


III. TREATISES OF RICHARD ROLLE OF ITAMPOLE 

The selections from the writings of Richard Rolle are^ from Thornton MS. 
A I, 1 7, preserved in the Library of Lincoln Cathedral. They have been edited 
by Perry (EETS.,20), by Mat2ner(‘Spmchproben,’ II, 1 20), and by Horstmann 
C Richard Rolle and his Followers,' I, 184). Hampole, where Rolle Hved as 
a hermit, and from which he takes his name, is near Doncaster in South York- 
shire. As the Thornton MS. was written about 1330-40 (Rolle died in 1349), 
these treatises represent the Northern dialect of the first half of the fourteenth 
century. 

Rolle was a prolific writer of both prose and verse, Latin and English. Some 
of his most important works in English are the ‘ Prick of Conscience ’ and the 
' Mirror of Life' in verse, and a translation and exposition of the Psalms in 
prose. The extracts give a good example of the religious character of all his 
writings, most of which are tinctured by the asceticism he exemplified in his 

life. ^ . 1. 

As to language Rolle’s Treatises are pure Northern, for example, in the 
appearance of d for OE. « with no mixture of Ml. p. 

Page 143, 1. 23- thre kyndis. Cf. Pliny’s ‘Natural Hist.,' XI, 10, on 
which this is based. 26. fete, MS. fette. The MS. form perhaps indicates 
shortening of the vowel ; zi.fotie=/dt fette = fit in ‘ Cursor Mundi.* 

Page 144, 1.* 10. Aristotill sais. The reference is to the so-called 
‘ Historia Animalium,’ IX, 40. 14. kame halde in ]>§ ordyre of Info 

ynesche. The MS. lacks and Matzner supplies of instead, placing it after 
ynesche^ but without improving the sense of the passage. Perry in his edi^on 
solved the difficulty by translating as ^towards/ a wholly impossible 

rendering. The meaning seems to be, ‘ For there are many that can never hold 
in the condition (ordyre) of tender love their friends,' «&c. For lufe ynesche 
cfi hnesce htfu in the Alfredian ‘Past. Care,’ 17, ii. 19. wormes, Horst- 
mann alters to wormed ~ wermod^ ‘ wormwood,’ but the change is too violent 
and quite unnecessary, ‘ Worms ’ was often used figuratively for that corruption 
characteristic of the devil’s working. Besides, though this is not (Conclusive, 
the alteration of OE. wermod toward wormwood does not appear until the 
fifteenth century, 24. Arystotill sais. Cf. * Hist. Anim.,' IX, 7 and 8. 



TREATISES OF RICHARD ROLLS OF HAMPOLE 289 


Page 14 : 5 , 1 . 4 . strucyo or stork. As Matzner points out, Rolle lias 
confused the ostrich and the stork, the Latin name being the same for both, 
12, mawmetryse, Matzner assumes this as a second form of maumetrU^ but 
the latter was used for *idol’ as well as ‘idolatry,* and this seems merely a 
plural in the latter sense. Perhaps Rolle had in mind the deos alienos of 
the Vulgate. the wylke. Note the voiced initial ze/, instead of the 
unvoiced hw {qu) of Nth. ; cf. whilke ( 1 . 14). 27 . dispyses, MS. dis- 

pyse. Matzner’s alteration is adopted on account of the syntax. Horst- 
mann retains the MS. reading without explanation. 

Page 146 , 1 . 1. wondes. For for u (older n) in such words cf. Mors- 
bach, ‘ Mittelenglische Gram.,’ § 125 b, and Heuser, ‘ Eng. St.,* XXVII, 353. 
e. rescheyves. The writing with sch must be assumed to represent as in 
some other Nth. foms. 8. athes brfkynge ; of new prf chynge. The 
punctuation of this passage has met with curious treatment by different editors. 
Without illustrating these at length, I understand there are three ways of taking 
the name of God in vain, false swearing, vain preaching, and prayer without the 
spirit. The difficulty is that Rolle, forgetting the exact connexion, has introduced 
the three clauses in three different ways, 13 . ill styrringes. ‘ Evil passions.' 
Even in Old English the word had acquired this metaphorical sense as applied to 
the mind, and it is so used several times by Rolle, as well as by other writers. 

14 . pi halydaye. Matzner suggests that/f should be ‘ the.* But the text 
of John Gaytryge’s sermon, which quotes Rolle, shows that the commandment 
is given a direct and personal application, and the MS. is therefore correct. 

15 . sesse. This is OF. cesser in its exact form, while beside it is found ME. 
cise(n), MnE. cease, 16 . si then, special!. This second ‘ manner’ is omitted 
in Thornton MS., hut is supplied from Arundel MS. of John Gaytryge’s sermon, 
quoting Rolle. 31 . may wyne. Perry wholly misunderstood the passage, 
and altered it. It is complete as it stands ; ‘ That they may win that (which) 
God promised to such children, that is land of light.* 

Page 147 , 1 . 2. slaa = sla. The nsual Anglian form of original slahan, 
W^'S. slean, 10. oys. A form peculiar to the Nth. dialect; cf. Jameson’s 
‘ Scottish Diet.’ 24 . neghtbour. The common occurrence of this form 
with excrescent t proves that it is a natural development in Nth.; it is still 
found in Scotch. 


IV. A METRICAL HOMILY— THE SIGNS OF THE DOOM 

The ' Metrical Homily ' here chosen is from a MS. preserved in the Library 
of the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons at Edinburgh, though also 
found in at least five different MSS. in Cambridge, Oxford, and London. 
A portion of this MS. was edited by John Small in 1862, and short extracts are 
given by Matzner (‘ Sprachproben,’ I, 278) and Morris (‘Specimens,’ II, 83). 
The collection was made about 1330 — ^whereisnot known— and thus represents 
the Northern dialect of the first half of the fourteenth century. 

The Homilies, of which this is one, became an important feature of litera- 
ture, especially in the North. They consist of a paraphrase of the Scripture for 
the day, a homily interpreting it, and a legend or tale illustrating the subject. 
Gradually there grew up a series of these poetical homilies connected with the ' 

U 



290 


IT, THE NORTHERN DIALECT 


gospel story, as in the ‘ Ormulum/ or with the Scripture lessons assigned by the 
church, as in the collection from which our extract is taken. These foaowed 
the ecclesiastical year, beginning with Advent, our selection being that for the 
second Sunday in Advent. The metre is the common rimed couplet of four 
stresses. 

Pag© 148, 1, 1. Today. The second Siinday in Advent, the gospel for 
which is Luke xxi. 25* The writing of Louk for Luh indicates a true long 2^, 
as sometimes in Nth.; cf, Behrens, ‘Franz. Sprache in England, 

11. bes rfdnes. Based on Matt xxiv. 29, probably associated with Joel 11. 10, 
ar * hi. 15, the second of which mentions that the sun shall be turned into blood, 
Cf.^150, 20-24. 13. Por mihti gastes. The Vulgate has nam mrttdes 

coelomm 7 n(yvebuntur^ translated in our version ‘ the powers of the heaven shall 
be shaken.’ The mediceval poet has taken mrhties to refer to one of the orders 
of angels, the ‘virtues’ of Milton’s ‘Par. Lost,’ V, 75*2. 26. An 

occasional foim of OF. Jruit \ cf. Behrens, ‘Franz. Sprache in England, 

P* 159- 

Page 149, 1. 7. Als qua sai. ‘As any one may say.* The two lines are 
the poet’s explanation, Christ’s words ending with 1. 6. The next lines seem 
to be put in direct form, though not based on any words of Christ. 9. Quen 
bis world. Cf. note on 77, 6. 12. For mi kinric. No doubt based on 

Luke i. 33. 15. pe maister. The reference is not clear, unless intended for 

Jerome, mentioned at 151, 13. 23. Kinric sal See Luke x.xi. 10; Matt, 

xxiv. 8. 27. sal bald baret. Probably the true reading should be 

the adv., ‘ quickly.’ 

Pag3 150, 11. 11-12. baret . . . mft. Perhaps met is short here, as indicated 
by such spellings as uteit in other Nth- texts. 20. As sais Joel. In three 
passages Joel mentions such signs, ch. ii. 10, 31 and hi. 15. 

Page 151, 1. 13. Sain Jerom telles. These ‘signs of the doom,’ attri- 
buted to Jerome, are not found in his works as printed, and probably belong to 
some work now lost. Jerome is said to have found them in a Hebrew MS., as 
in ‘Cursor Muudi,’ I, 22, 441 : 

‘Als Jeromme that well man trowes 
Telles he fand in the bok of Juwis.’ 

Pag© 162, 1. 24, And cum. This line is followed by thirty-three Latin 
verses on the signs, with the rubric : Isti versus omittantur a lectore quando 
legit Anglkum cor(i7n laycis. 

Page 164, 1. 1. A blak munk. That is, one who wore a black habit, as 
a Benedictine ; cf. reference to ‘ Rule of Saint Benet ’ (155, 24). A similar tale 
is told by Roger Wendover in his ‘ Chronicle ’ under the year 1072. 8. Fai]5- 

ful frendes. The MS. clearly needs emendation, and the Camb. MS. seems to 
suggest the proper correction. 13 - 14 , felid . . , telld. The rime is no doubt 
monosyllabic, with shortening of the vowel of fSld {{fildd)^ as in weak preterits 
of the first class. 

Pag© 165, 1. 28. §v©rl6p. The strict English form would h& gverllp 
(Camb. WS,overle^e\ and this one is probably of Scand. origin ; see Bjorkman> 
‘Scandinavian Loan-Words in Middle English,’ p. 71. Cf. English lope^ elpfe. 



THE SONGS OF LAWRENCE MINOT 


29 T 


V. THE SONGS OF LAWRENCE MINOT 

The ‘Songs of Minot,’ preserved in a single MS., Cotton Galba E IX of 
the British Museum, have been frequently edited. They are found in Ritson’s 
‘Poems on Interesting Events in the Reign of Edward III’ (1795, 1825), 
Wright’s ‘ Political Poems’ (1859), ‘ Quellen und Forschungen,’ 52 (Scholle, 
1884), and in Hall’s ‘Poems of Lawrence Minot’ (1887). Extracts occur in 
Matzner (‘ Sprachproben,’ I, 320), Morris (‘Specimens,’ II, 126), Wiilker 
(‘Lesebuch,’ I, 77). Nothing is known of the author but his name, and his 
probable connexion with the Minots of Yorkshire or Norfolk in the fourteenth 
century. The poems were clearly written at the time of the events they 
celebrate, so that they represent the Nth. dialect of about 1333 to 1332, some- 
what modified by a Midland copyist ; or possibly Minot lived on the border of 
the two districts and used a mixed dialect. Cf. Scholle, p. vii j Hall, p. xvii. 

The ‘ Songs of Minot ’ represent the native political lyric which had been 
first written in England in the second half of the thirteenth century, beside 
Latin and Anglo-Norman poems of the same sort. The poet takes a religious- 
patriotic view of Edward’s victories, with special emphasis of the attitude of 
Englishmen toward Scotchmen at this time. The poems chosen are the first 
three of the eleven preserved as a monument to Minot’s genius. The metres of 
the poems are various, as indicated by the selections, and in this respect suggest 
the new metrical influences of the fourteenth century. 

The language of Minot’s poems, as already indicated, is a mixture of 
Northern and Midland, veiy likely due to a scribe. It has been especially 
investigated by Scholle and Hall, as by Bierbaum, ‘ tJber Lawrence Minot und 
seine Lieder’ (1876), and Dangel, ‘ Lawrence Minot’s Gedichte’ (1888). 

Pags 157 , 1 . 9 . Lithes. All but two of the poems are introduced by 
short couplets giving the general subject of the poem. A few of the main 
points of history leading up to the battle of Halidon Hill may be briefly given. 
Robert Bruce had gained the independence of Scotland by the treaty of 
Northampton (1328), but died the year after, leaving the throne to a son eight 
years old. Civil dissensions arising, Edward Balliol, claimant of the Scottish 
throne, headed an invading force of English barons who claimed estates in 
Scotland (1332). Edward III, who had opposed the expedition until its 
success in the crowning of Balliol at Scone, now obtained an acknowledgement 
of England’s suzerainty and supported Balliol when driven from the realm. He 
personally appeared before Berwick, which had been garrisoned by Balliol’s 
opponents, after Easter, 1333, and the battle chronicled resulted (July 19) from 
one of several unsuccessful attempts of the Scots to raise the siege. 11. trgne. 
The correct form of the word from OF. trone. Later, written throne in imita- 
tion of Lat. ihromtm^ the iJi came to be pronounced like th from OE.^. Cf. 
author^ authority^ apothecaiy. 18 . dresce my dedes. Perhaps in allusion 
to Ps. xc. 19; cf. 103 , 19. 19 . In ]?is dale. As in other of the ‘Songs,’ 

the first line of each stanza after the first repeats an emphatic word, sometime? 
a phrase, from the last line preceding. In the only departure from this ( 159 , 9) 
pat forsaid tonne takes the place of Berwick in 1 . 8. FOr such linking of 
stanzas cf. * Pearl,’ ‘ Aunters of Arthur,’ and other poems of Northern or North- 
west Midland. 20. derne, MS, dern. Hall thinks MS. reading a mistake 
for derv (derve)^ * terrible, injurious.’ But OAng. dermj WS. dieme^ means 

U 2 



292 


XL THE NORTHERN DIALECT 


* deceitful, evil’ as well as ' secret/ and I see no reason to chang-e the word, 
except to add ^for metrical reasons. 23. J)e Franchemen. I his refers to 
a fleet of ten ships, armed and victualled by Philip VI of France {Philip Valays 
of 158, 2 q), which had been sent in aid of the Scotch besieged m Berwick, 
according to the French chronicler Nangis. These were defeated and the 
vessels destroyed by the English fleet at Dundee (i 333)* ^6. ^ noght ‘wortli 

a pere A gieat number of such expressions are common in Middle ana 
Modern English ; cf. Matzner’s * Grammar/ II, 2, 128, and the expression at 
158, 8. 

Page 158, 1. 2. }>§ bgste of ISTormandye. The French ships were armed 
with Norman sailors, between whom and those of the Cinque Ports there was long 
rivalry. This probably, rather than any traditional hatred of the Norman con- 
querors, accounts for the exultation over their defeat. 8.^ And all ]>aire 
fare. Note development in meaning of fare, ' journey, going/ into * behavior, 
boasting/ and cf. the same change in the word gaiL ^ 

Morre. A rising at Annan (Dec. 13, 1332), under John Rai^olph, Earl of 
Moray, and Archibald Douglas, Earl of Dunbar, had expelled Edward Ballioi 
from the kingdom. 27. pa«i said. The Scotch who had been expelled from 
the kingdom by Ballioi and his English followers. 29. Philip Valays. 
Note the form at 159, 21 and the MS. reading. See note to 157, 23. 

Page 159, 1. 7. all naked. The stripping of the dead is illustrated by 
Barbour’s 'Bruce,’ XIII, 459 f, in describing the battle of Bannockburn ; 

' And quen Jai nakit spuljeit war 
J?at war slayne in pe battale par, 

It wes, forsuth, a gret ferly 
Till se sammyn so feill dede ly.’ 

18. At Donde. See note to 157, 23. 29. Sir Jgn pe Oomyn. John 

Comyn of Badenocb, killed by Robert Bruce in the church of the Minorites at 
Dumfries, Feb. 10, 1306. Comyn was Balliol’s nephew and heir, and at his 
death Bruce definitely began the struggle for independence which ended at 
Bannockburn. For the Scotch use of the before a surname see note in Boswell’s 
‘ Tour of the Hebrides,’ Sept. 6. 

Page 160, 1. 1, pare dwelled. That is, before Berwick. 3. He gaf 
gude confort. He encouraged them in a speech that lasted as long as it 
would take to go a mile. Examples in Matzner (' Worterbuch ’) show this to 
have been a common expression. On fat plaine, as Hall points out, is not 
appropriate to the hilly ground of the battle field, but as Mmot was probably 
not present at the battle he uses the expression in a general sense. 13. Now 
for to tell. Eridently this is not a title in the strict sen^, since Minot gives 
no account of Bannockburn. He regarded Halidon Hill as avenging the 
former defeat of the English, and in this sense is to treaty?/ batayl of Banochum. 
17. many saklfs. Hall quotes Barbour’s ^ Brace/ XX, 1 73 f, where Bruce says ; 

^For px-ou me and my warraying 
Of blud par has beyne gret spilling 
Qiihar many sakles men wes slayne.’ 

21. Saint Jghnes toun. This is Perth, occupied and fortified by the English 
after defeating the Scotch at Gaskmoor, or Dupplin Moor. A church in Perth 
is dedicated to St. John, and this accounts for the name ; cf. Froissart’s use of 



THE SONGS OF LAWRENCE MINOT 293 

St. Jehamtone. 27. Striflin. That is, Stirling, the Strevillyne of Barbour’s 
* Bruce.* Perhaps the allusion is to Wallace’s most famous victory over the 
English, Sept, ii, 1297. The implication then is that Halidon Hill had wiped 
out the memory of that defeat also. 

Page 161, 1. 1. pe pilers. Matzncr, Wiilker, and Kolbing take this as 
meaning ‘pillars,* either of state or boundaries of the country, but Hall is 
doubtless right in assuming connexion with OF, pilleur (AN. ‘ robber, 

raider,’ 6. Bughfute riveling. The rivelmg is a rough shoe made of 
raw hide tied round the ankle, and regarded as characteristic of the Scotch, 
who were thus called ‘ rough-footed.* So Skelton’s ‘Of the out yles the roughe 
foled Scoltes,* I, 187. Bfrebag. So called because the Scotch soldier 
carried his own baggage and was thus enabled to move more rapidly. 
8. Brughes. The MS. drig represents one pronunciation of the name ; but 
Minot uses Brtige {Brughes^ Burglies), all with zi, and the last no doubt 
a scribal error for Bmghes. The place was well known to Scotchmen in the 
fourteenth century. 11. bftes pe stretes. Hall thinks imitated from OF. 
batre les chemins^ ‘ to riot or revel in the streets,* but the idea of revelling seems 
hardly appiopriate, and the words may mean no more than ‘go about the 
streets persistently.’ 23. How Edward. Out of the war with Scotland 
came the great Hundred Years’ War with France, Scotland’s ally. At the 
beginning of 1338 Philip attacked Agen in Gascony, still claimed by England, 
and Edward was forced to declare war. He crossed to Antwerp (162, 30) in 
July, in order to negotiate with his allies the princes of the Low Countries, and 
Lewis of Bavaria (162, 9), the German emperor. 

Page 162, 1. 3. his right. The claim to France, more or less fully 
acknowledged by the French king himself. The war on the part of France 
was virtually a straggle to free all French territory from English rule, an end 
accomplished at the close of the Hundred Years’ War in 1451. 9. pe 

Kayser Lewis of Bavere. Louis IV, German king and Roman emperor 
from 1314 to 1347. Though he had been excommunicated by the pope, the 
electors, in the very month of Edward’s departure for the continent, declared 
his power was derived from them and not from the church. The reception of 
Edward was by no means as flattering as Minot makes out. 31. made 
his mone playne. Louis had made Edward vicar-general of the empire, 
and he was empowered to coin money to pay his German auxiliaries. Jehan 
le Bel says he ‘ coined money in great abundance at Antwerp,* 

Page 163, 1, 23. at Hamton. On Oct. 4, 1338, the French from fifty 
galleys landed at Southampton, plundered the country, and burned the town 
on hearing that the English were gathering to oppose them. So rapidly did 
the country, rise that some three hundred of the French were cut off from 
their ships. 

Page 164, 1. 7. ]7an saw pai. The poet has reversed the order of events, 
for the Christopher was taken by the French before the attack on Southampton 
(Froissart’s ‘Chionicle,* cli. 44). It was later recovered by Edward after the 
battle of the Swyn, 8. Aremouth. The word has gained an initial^ in 
modem English, as also the river Yar, on which it is situated. 11. galays. 
These were long narrow boats used by the Genoese and sailors of the 
Mediterranean. In 1337 Philip had engaged twenty such galleys cf two 



//. THE NORTHERN DIALECT 


294 

Kundred oars from Ayton Doria of Genoa, wlio was present at tlie attack on 
Southampton. 12 . tarettes. A large vessel like a galley, but commonly 
used for transport. 13 . galiptes. These were similar to the galleys, biit 
about half the size, each carrying a crew of one hundred men. 17 . E award 
dure King. Hall notes that no chronicler mentions the presence of Edward 
at the fight, and perhaps the poet has confused the Edward with the 
king, a suggestion of Sir Hanis Nicolas in his * History of the Navy, II, 37. 
27. put ■pam to were. Surely Hall is wrong in suggesting that this may 
mean ‘ put the enemy in distress.* It is, as Skeat explains, * prepared_them- 
selves for battle,’ ‘ put themselves (in readiness) to war.^ 32 . withowteu 
hire. Literally, ‘ without hire or recompense,’ but idiomatically for a con- 
quered and ignominious condition. Similarly in Minot s ‘ Poems, Vli, 05-00 : 

‘Inglis men with site J>am soght ^ 

And hastily quit Jam Jaire hire’; 
that is, vanquished them. 

Page 165 , 1 . 9 . sen pe time pat God was bom. Often used to emphaj- 
size a situation by referring to a long time in general. 26 . yith his haly 
hand. The expression depends ultimately, doubtless, on the biblical use of 
the hand as a symbol of power and goodness. 


VI. BARBOUR’S < BRUCE ’—THE PURSUIT OF KING ROBERT 

The ‘Bruce’ occurs in two MSS., of which the better, so far as it is 
complete, is MS. G 23 in the Library of St. John’s College, Cambridge. 
This was made the basis for the edition of Prof Skeat for the Early English 
Text Society (Extra Series 12, 21, 29, 55), though the Edinburgh MS. had 
to be used for the first four books. The ‘ Bruce ’ has been frequently prmted, 
as by Hart (1616), Pinkerton (i 79 °)> Jamieson (1820) ; see also a list of 
editions in Skeat’s ‘Introduction,' p. Ixvi. Selections are found in Matzner 
(‘ Sprachproben,’ I, 371) and Morris (‘ Specimens,’ II, 203). The poem was 
completed in 1378, and therefore represents Northern of the last half of the 
fourteenth century, except for such differences as come from a later copyist, 
the MS. being a little more than a century younger than the original. As 
Barbour was Archdeacon of Aberdeen from 1357 to his death in 1395, the 
Northern dialect here represented is that of the extreme North or Scottish 
English. Of Barbour little is certainly known. I-Ie first appears In 1357 as 
Archdeacon of Abeideen, when he was granted a safeguard to study at 
Oxford, From the responsible position he held at the time it is inferred that 
he was bom about 1320. He again visited England for study in 1364J 3 -J^d 
passed through it to P'rance in 1365 and 1368. He attained further honor 
in his own country, held a position in the king of Scotland’s household, and 
was granted several sums of money by the king at different times. According 
to Wyntoun’s ‘Chronicle’ (about 1420), on the authority of which rests 
the ascription of the ‘Bruce’ to Barbour, he also wrote the ‘Bait’ and 
a genealogical poem called the ‘ Original of the Stuarts.’ Two other works 
formerly attributed to Barbour, the ‘ Siege of Troy ’ and a collection of ‘ Lives 
of Saints,’ have been shown not to belong to him. 



BARBOUR^S ^ BRUCE 


S95 


The ‘Bruce’ is a national epic, valuable alike for history and literature. 
It consists of some 13,500 lines, and covers the years 1286 to 1335. The 
passage chosen is a good example of the poet’s power in vivid narration. 
Just before the selection begins, John of Lorn had sought to track the king 
with a hound, and five of Ins men had been slain by the king and his foster- 
brother. The latter then retreat before Lorn’s approaching company to a wood 
near at hand. 

As already noticed the MS. is younger than the work itself by a century, 
and this no doubt accounts for some differences in language, or at least in 
orthography. For example, the Northern use of i (j/) after a long vowel to 
indicate length becomes more common. Compare such limes as ivayn ; 
])air^ mar\ agane^ vayn\ and such forms as soynif ‘ soon,’ heir, ‘ here,’ deill^ 
‘deal,’ in the early lines. Perfect participles ending in t instead of d are also 
common. 

Page 166, 1. 7. begouth. Note this interesting example of analogj^ 
formed on the model of cduih^ prctent of cati. This was perhaps assisted by 
the constant confusion, especially in Nth., of caft and^<2«. 9. His man. 

Really his foster-brother, as shown by 173, 15, and by references in Book VI 
of the poem. 10. Aby de 5he heir. ‘ If you abide here ’ ; the subjunctive 
in condition. 

Page 167, 1. 9. Jphn of Lome. John MacDougal of Lorn in Argyle- 
shire, son of Allaster of Lorn, and descendant cf Somerled, Thane of Argyle 
and Lord of the Isles, who fell at Renfrew in 1164. See Scott’s ‘ Lord of the 
Isles’ and notes thereon. 

_ Page 168, 1. 11. Ifst on. lif. ‘ Last, or remain, alive.’ 27. Schir 
Amer. Sir Aymer de Valence, Earl of Pembroke and leader of the English 
forces. He was a son of the half-brother of Henry III. 

Page 169, 1. 1. Schir Thomas Bandale. Sir Thomas Randolph, Bruce’s 
nephew, fiist fought with the latter until made prisoner at the battle of 
Methven. Then, submitting to the English, he even took part against Bruce 
as indicated here. Later, captured by Douglas, he was reconciled to his 
uncle and made Earl of Moray (Murray). He now distinguished himself by 
many exploits, especially the capture of Edinburgh. See note to ‘ Lord of the 
Isles,’ VI, I, and reference to his descendant John Randolph in Minot 
(158, 26). 9. And how. An adventure narrated in Book VI, 589 f. 

Five of Lorn’s men had overtaken Biuce and his brother, but were all slain by 
the two, Bruce himself killing four. 17. And he war bpdyn all fvynly. 

‘ If he weie bidden or challenged (to fight) on even terms.’ 19. And Jo 
gnd kyng. This adventure is told with some alterations by Scott in ‘ Lord 
of the Isles,’ III, 18 f. 26. Lik to lichtmen, Skeat explains as light- 
armed men ; cf. light ‘horse. 

Page 170, 1. 14. bryng hym pan of daw. * Bring him then out of day,* 
that is, ‘ kill him,’ a common ME. idiom. 

Page 171, 1. 3. slew fyre. Skeat replaces slew of both MSS. by sirahe, 

* struck,’ on the ground that slew must have been repeated from the preceding 
line. On the other hand, slew fire is not uncommon (cf. the ‘ Bruce,’ XIII, 26), 
and I prefer to keep the MS. reading. 10. At a fyre. * At a fire,’ with 



296 


JL THE NORTHERN DIALECT 


stress on a ‘one/ The line might still .be improved by an extra syllable, 
though the cgesural pause may account for its absence. 27. worthit. 
weak preterit of wur]?e(n), ‘ be, become ‘ saw that sleep had become necessary 
to him.’ 

Page 172, 1. 1. And slepit nocht. Skeat reads Anc^ slepit nocht [fuil'\ 
ynherly. \Bot ^liffnyt tip oft] suddaftly, supplying the bracketed words from 
JEdin. MS. With the different punctuation I have given the line, no sptactical 
alteration is necessary. 6. as foul on twist. Supposed to he indicative 
of readiness for any emergency ; cf. MnE. ‘ with one eye open m similar 
connexion. 

Page 173, 1. 6. OSTa war. Pret. subj. ‘and had [it] not been [for] the 
arming (armor)/ &c. 18. his trist. Bruce had divided his men into small 

bands when hard pressed, and had appointed a rendezvous for such as should 
not be taken. His party alone had been followed by the hound. 

Page 174, 1. 29. James of Pouglas. This Douglas, son of William 
who supported Wallace, had been the first to take up the cause of Bruce, and 
one of the most faithful. 31. at. At for pat is especially common in Nth., 
though no doubt found in all dialects as a reduced form of the spoken lan- 
guage. 32. Edward pe Bruce. The brother of Robert, fiery and head- 
strong. As Barbour says, thinking Scotland too small for him and his 
brother he tried to make himself king of Ireland, but lost his life in the 
attempt ; cf. Book XVIII* 



THE SOUTHERN DIALECT, INCLUDING 
KENTISH 


Southern English represents several somewhat different varieties. In our 
selections the first three pieces are of Early Southern, in which, as in Early 
Midland, certain changes of Old English forms had not yet taken place. 
The third of these pieces belongs to Southern of the so-called KatWine 
group (Morsbach, ‘ ME. Gram.,' § 3, anm. 2), that is, shows a Southern 
English with Midland peculiarities. This is due to the fact that the works of 
this group were written in a northern part of the Southern region near to 
Midland. Selections VI and VII represent Kentish English, the remaining 
pieces Southern of the normal type,* 


I. THE POEMA MORALE, OR ‘MORAL ODE* 

This characteristic bit of mediaeval moralizing exists in six MSS,, Digby 
A 4, Egerton 613 (two versions), and Jesus Coll. I Arch. I 29 at Oxford, 
Lambeth MS. 487 in London, Trinity Coll. MS. B 14, 52 at Cambridge. 
Not all of the MSS. are complete, and of the two groups into which they fall, 
the versions in Digby and Trinity Coll. MSS. are Kentish rather than Southern 
in the more restricted sense. Of the Sth. texts those of the Egerton MSS. are, 
on the whole, the best, and a selection from Egerton e is here taken. The 
poem has been edited at various times, as by Fumivall in ‘ Early English 
Poems and Lives of Saints,’ p. 22 ; by Morris Old English Homilies,’ I, 
159, 28S, II, 220) ; Specimens,’ I, 194) ; (‘An Old English Miscellany,' p. 58) ; 
by Zupitza (< Anglia,' I, 6) ; (‘Ubungsbuch,’ p. 58) ; by Lewin in a critical 
edition (1881). The poem was written about 1170 in South Hampshire or 
Doisetshire, and thus represents Southern of the middle district. 

The ‘ Moral Ode * consists of 396 long lines of seven stresses, riming in 
couplets. As in the * Ormulum,' with the metre of which it has close rela- 
tions, the long line is divided into two parts by a csesural pause after the 
fourth stress, so that each couplet might be printed in alternate lines of four 
and three stresses, riming abcb. Indeed this is the original of such a stanza 
in MnE. poetry, and this is the second stage in the development from the 
unrimed lines of Orm. The lines are often irregular in number of syllables, 
though many irregularities may be easily explained as due to lost inflexional 
or other elements, or to metrical peculiarities of Middle English. In content 
the poem begins with a penitential portion of eighteen lines in the first person, 
after which the moralizing becomes more general in character, and approaches 
that of a sermon in verse. The selection gives a good idea of the Whole, 

The language of the * Ode ' shows a mixture of early and late forms to some 
extent; cf § for OE, a in the rimes of the fiist couplet, but d usually. 



IL THE SOUTHERN DIALECT 


298 


Besides, <2 (e) appear for \VS. a, ea-, a, ea for WS. S, ea, besj^e « = rarely 
io {to') are found for WS. eo {ed), and the former sometimes for WS. a, as m 
■ailorde, ‘word.’ These are in addition to the typical Sth. r<, k for Wb.^-, 
though occasionally y, as in ylde, yfeh. As to inflexion. Southern is ™?re 
conservative than Midland or Northern, and therefore longer retains Old 
English forms ; there are also typical Southern peculianties which have been 
already sufficiently mentioned in the Grammatical Introduction. 


Page 176, 1. 1. Icli. This is the characteristic Sth. form of the pronoun with 
ch as in church from OE. c after a palatal vowel. Note that both other forms 
also occur in the selection, ic (1. 2), / (1. 4). 1-2. Ipre . 

Sth. rime modifying the earlier Idre . . . mdrei cf. ma^e . . . (177, 5"“^/ 

dre ., . mare (177, 29-30). 3. habbe. The Sth. dialect, with characten^tic 

conservatism, retains such forms in case of verbs with different consonaiUs in 
infinitive and ist pers. pres, indie, from those in the remaining forms. Thus 
inf. habbeCn), libbe{n\ seggeiin), and ist pers. pies, indie, habhe, libbe (177, 9), 
segge. In the Anglian districts, on the other hand, under the influence^ of 
analogy, these have adopted the consonant of the other pres, forms, as have\it\ 
lwe(n\ seie(n\ ‘ have, live, say.’ Cf. Gram. Introd., § 165. ibeon. Note 
the characteristic Sth. prefix, a retention of OE. ge in reduced form. In this 
particular instance no 0£. geheo7t is known to literature, but it must have 
existed in speech at some time. 7. chilche. This difficult word, known 
only here, seems to have been formed from child (On. ^chilis for cliilds f.), as 
OE. milts, ME. piilce (milckeT), is formed from mild. At least the meaning, 
‘ childishness, pueiility,’ seems to fit the connexion fairly well. 21. pe wel 
ne dej?. The OE. relative particle }e was retained in Sth. much longer than 
in the other dialects. 


Page 177, 1. 6. oSres. Note retention in early Sth. of the OE. inflexion 
of the adjective. 12, Manies mannes. The line has met somewhat 
different interpretations, based especially on different conceptions of the words 
iswinch and wiholde. Morris (* Specimens,’ I, 35°) translates : ‘ Many a man’s 
sore trouble often hath ungracious ones, i.e. a man often receives no return for 
his hard work.’ In < OE. Homilies ’ he translates quite freely : ‘ many kinds of 
sore trouble have often the infirm.* Lewin, opposing this quite rightly, finally 
proposes manches Mannes saner errufige^teii Cewinn hahen oft die XVider- 
sacher. The sense is ‘ Ungracious (or hostile) ones often obtain (have) the 
sore labor (or gain) of many a man,’ and is probably based on Ps. xxxix. 6 
and Luke xii. 20. 13. don a furst. Literally, ‘ put in time or respite,’ 

and so ‘ put off, or delay,’ The phrase occurs in several forms, do hi Jirsie 
(‘ GE. Homilies,’ do... on /rest Havelok,’ 1. r ,337)» printed by bkeat 

and Holthausen onfrest. 21. of wffe me of childe. The imperfect rime 
chtlde , , . selde is at once suspicious, and it is not strange to find other MSS. 
with a different reading. The Lambeth reading of ^efe 7ie of ^elde, * of gift nor 
of reward,’ is probably the older form of the line. 23. wel oft and wel 
5el6me. A common phrase with two words for the same idea, in order to give 
it emphasis. 26. se ireve. The prevalence of }e for OE. se throws some 
suspicion on this expression. Digby MS, reads ne his serreve, ‘ nor his sheriff,’ 
and Trin. MS. ne ne scirreve. Lewin reads ne pc sciri^eve. 


Page 178, 1. 12. And f-e Ife mare. ' And the one who may do no more 
(may do) with Ms good intention as well as he that has many pieces (manke) 



THE POEM A MORALE, OR 'MORAL ODE' 299 


of gold.’ 14 . kan mare pane. The phrase is OE. cunnan fonc, beside 

•wita 7 t }onc, and it has survived in Scotch con ihmtks. Literally, ‘to know 
thanks,’ it is equivalent to ‘ feel (or express) gratitude, show favor.’ * And 
often God feels more gratitude to those who give less to him.’ 19 . bitS. 
The plural subjects are thought of as one and so take singular verb ; cf. deti . . . 
denchel (17S, 22), where the verbs agree with hzvei, not with zvihie, the real 
subject. 

Page 179 , 1 . 3 . scnle we. Based on the OE. form when the verb was 
immediately followed by we or ge. In Middle English it was extended to the 
third jiersonal pronoun also ; cf. scule he (1. 6), but Nabbed hi (1. 9). 8. vele. 

Note this first case in our Sth. selections of initial v for older / 28 . com 

to manne. ‘ Came to man’s estate.’ 

Page 180 , 1 . 4 . ISe beot and bfat, and bit. All texts give two verbs 
with initial b, indicating intentional alliteration, and Lambeth agrees v ith our 
text in its three forms Met and bd and beL Three verbs that are possible in the 
place are OE.betan, ‘to amend,’ bedan, ME. b§de{ 7 i), ‘to pray,’ biddan, ‘to 
pray, beseech.’ The line then means : ‘therefore he is wise who repents and 
prays and beseeches before the judgement.’ Lewin bases his text on the Trin. 
MS. reading, )e bit ajid bi^et and bet, though I cannot think with a better 
result in sense. The former are all contracts of the third singular present 
indicative. 7 . Sunne 1ft pe. ‘ Sin leaves thee and thou not it (or them), 
when thou art not able to do them any more.* Hi may be either sing, or ph, 
but is of the following clause seems to indicate that it was considered plural. 
Lewin alters is to hi, in order to agree with the former word. This line and 
the next, owing to omission and erasure, cannot be easily made out in the MS. 
8. pe swa abit, ‘ Who so awaits,* that is as implied in the preceding line. 
14 . Ne bidde na bet. ‘ Should (I) not better pray to be loosed from bonds 
on doomesday ? ’ Several MSS. have ich {ic) after bidde, and it has probably 
disappeared from our text. 20. tJvel is. ‘ Evil is it to suffer seven years 
for seven nights’ bliss.’ Ovel is must be nndeistood with the next line also. 
32 . Por to tie muchel© murc'Se. ^ ‘For to come to the great bliss (of heaven) 
is happiness with certainty.’ 


II. ARTHUR’S LAST BATTLE— FROM LAYAMON’S ‘BRUT’ 

Layamon’s ‘Brut* is preserved in two MSS. of the British Museum, Cotton 
Calig. A IX and Otho C XIII, from the former of which, the older, our 
selection is taken. Both texts were edited in 1847 by Sir Frederic Madden, 
and extracts are given in Matzner (‘Sprachproben,* I, 2 1), Morris (‘Specimens,’ I, 
64), Zupitza-Schipper (‘tJbungsbuch,’ p. 92). The poem is the work of a 
priest Lasamon (later text Lawemon), but more commonly written Layamon, 
son of Leovenath, of Arnley in North Worcestershire, and was composed about 
1200. The language therefore represents Southern of the Western division 
during the last of the twelfth and beginning of the thirteenth century. 

The ‘Brut* consists of some 16,000 long lines (a little less than 15,000 in 
the later MS.), or double the number of short lines as ixrinted by Madden. 
These long lines are based on the older alliterative line and show frequent 
alliteration, though rime and assonance are also common in binding together 



11 , THE SOUTHERN DIALECT 


300 


the two half-lines. The metrical form is thus a combination of the old 
alliterative line and a rimed couplet of irregular character. Compare the 
similar lines of the ' Bestiary.* In content the poem is a legendary history of 
Britain from the destruction of Troy to the year 689 A.p. It is based on the 
Norman Wace’s ‘ Roman de Brut,* which in turn has its source in Geofirey 
of Monmouth’s ^ Historia Regum Britanniae.’ Our selection begins with 

13^996 (Madden, 1 . 27,992). Arthur, the world conqueror, resting after the 
great feast on the overthrow of the emperor of Rome, is summoned home 
by bad news as told in the passage chosen. r 1. . nr t 

The language of the poem does not greatly differ from that of the Moral 

Ode.’ It shows a similar mixture of older and later forms. ^ OE. a still 
appears as a, long and short are not infrequent, and eo are still preserved. 
The latter, eo^ sometimes appears for Sth, OE. as in w^ore, unl^s in<^ed 

this is for Ml, wSn with close e. Assuming the open quality of the first 

element, as indicating Sth. the e is marked open (|). Some Ml. forms 
certainly occur, as hdiden (183, 7 ), tieside h^lden ( 1 . 1416). Among con- 

sonants the Sth. initial v for OE ^is more common^ than in the Moral Ode. 

Inflexions show the usual Sth. conservatism, A special peculiarity of Layamon 
is the more frequent final n of inflexional forms, either retained froni an older 
inflexion or often added where not original; cfi Stratmann, 'Anglia,* III, 552. 
Examples are tlden, dsg. (181, i) ; deoren, nsg. (182, 13 ) J cttmen, pr. subj, sg. 
(183, 21); warTen, gpl. (184, 26), perhaps from OE. gpl. in ena. In many 

cases inflexional eu is a retention of OE. dpi. urn* The vocabulary of Layamon 

is full of epic phrases from OE. poetry, so full as to imply some considerable 
acquaintance with OE. literature. For convenience of reference the line- 
numbering of Madden is always given in the notes, except of course when 
referring to our selection. 


Page 181 , 1 . 1 . pa com pfr. Arthur is represented as being inne Burguine, 
'in Burgundy,’ when thenews reaches him. are. Note retention of inflexional 
forms in the pronoun, as are ~ OE. dnre\ fan ( 1 . 2) ^fdm ; him ( 1 . 20) ; dm 
(L 29) f. asg. ; }ire ( 1 . 23) == }(£re. 8. Modrfde. In setting out from 

England Arthur had left his kingdom in charge of Modred and Wenhavere 
(Guenevere), as told at 1 . 25,465 t Madden). 6. Swa naver. ‘Yet never 
would he,’ the young knight. Only in a supernatural manner, through the 
vision, does Arthur find out the truth. 17 . Walwain, B text Waweyii. 
Better known as Gawain, nephew of Arthur and brother of Modred. 22 . "W en,- 
liever, B text Gwenayfer, The Welsh Gweithwyvar, Eng. Guen&vere, In 
JLayamon she is simply an extremely fair woman, whose mother was of Roman 
birth and relative of Cador, Earl of Cornwall. 24 , to heeldeii. The 
MuE. form has lost final d and appears as heel, ‘ to incline.’ ^ Layamon’s word 
seems to be Midland hSlde 7 t, a form which also appears in his text. 


Page 182 , I. 6. dSore mine sweorde. This order of adjective and 
possessive is especially common in Layamon. Cf, the Elizabethan dear my 
lord. 


Page 183 , 1 . 20. guen. The MS. que is probably for ^ue ** Quen, Uiough 
the commoner form in Layamon is qume. 21 . oumen. The form is pres, 
subj. with excrescent n so common in Layamon. Cf . pat Ardurpider cojjten, 
' that Arthur thither should come,’ 11 . 27,078 and 19,110 (Madden). 27 . pa 
ssst Idt, ' Then it remained all still.’ 



ARTHUR^ S LAST BATTLE 


301 


Page 184, 1. 18. vseisi'S, MS. waeisiU. Madden suggested the change, 
required by the context and alliteration. Cf. feiesi^e m^ede (1. 304) and 
f(siesiSe (1. 26,040), in both cases alliterating with f. Here, of course, we 
must assume an earlier f-f alliteration, now become f-v or v~v by the regular 
Sth. change of initial f to •v, 28. !ha, MS. a. The third_ personal 

pronoun, both masc. and fern., sometimes appears as 5, ka, 32. A marten 
pat hit. So MS., but the correct reading is probably/^, 'when.’ The B text 
has J>o^ 'when.* and Drihten. ‘And the Lord had sent it (the day),’ 
perhaps referring to its favorable character for an expedition. 

Page 186, 1. 3. Whitspnd. Wissant, Pas-de- Calais, called Hwitsand in 
the ‘ Chronicle ’ under the year 1095. 17. Childriche. Childric was in 

those days an emperor of great authority in Alemaine, as we are told at 1. 20,198. 
Arthur had already vanquished him when he came to Britain to assist Colgrim 
and Baldulf, as told in the lines following that quoted above. 

Page 186, 1. 9. Bomenel, MS. Romerel, Romney in Kent without 
doubt. 11. avorn on, MS. avornon. The phrase is an interesting example 
of the replacing of a worn-out form. Avorn is OE. o7t foran, the first part of 
which was no longer recognized in the reduced prefix a, and ot^ was again 
added at the end. 26. Angel. A king of Scotland whom Arthur had 
assisted to regain his kingdom. He had last led the foremost troop in the 
fight against ‘ Luces,’ emperor of Rome. The name appears as Aguisel in 
Wace, Au^isel {Angusell) in Geoffrey of Monmouth, and is possibly Scotch 
Angus, 

Page 187, 1. 2. ^tirren pa stanes. ‘ The stones babbled with streams of 
blood.’ ‘ Roar, resound ’ are too strong for ^trren^ which applied to the 
chattering of people, the whirring or singing of ropes when the ship met 
a storm; cf. garring^ from the same root, at 224, 15. Such exaggerated 
descriptions of battle are common in Layamon, as in all early poetry. 
Cf. 189, 32. 

Page 188, 1. 1. pe feond bine aje. ‘May the devil take him.*' 
30. and bu. The B text really reads ajta ou ^co himie ende^ with place for 
an initial in the last word. I have assumed the lost letter to be a/, and have 
otherwise used the forms of the A text. 31. pa beo bire seolf. No doubt 
this is one of the alternatives beginning with whcdSer, and we are to supply 
‘ or whether ’ at the beginning of this line. The loss of the preceding half-line 
makes the connexion uncertain. 

Page 189, 1. 16. swS pa rein failed, MS. rim failed. The change of 
rim to rein was suggested by Madden. Either this is a scribal error or 
perhaps the noun was influenced by the verb, which appears as rine^rinde in 
the ‘ Brut’ 20. Tambre. The river Tamar between Devon and Cornwall. 
In Malory’s ‘Morte D’Arthur’ the great fight is by the sea near Salisbury. 
21. Oamelford. A Camelford, ford of the Camel, still exists in the north of 
Cornwall, but is naturally not connected with the Tamar river. Geoffrey 
of Monmouth says the battle took place near the ‘ river Cambula,’ while Wace 
has Camhlan ,,, a V entree de CormiailUi Tamhre , . . en let terre de Como- 
ailh, Tamble, &c. in different MSS. (‘Brut,’ 1, 13,659). Confusion was easy 
because of the likeness between the MS. c and as well as by reason of the 



11. THE SOUTHERN DIALECT 


302 


frequent interchange of Once in the ' Chronicle * Camer?nuda is found for 
TamarmutSa. The reference to the sea (191, i) would imply a situation like 
that of Camelford in North Cornwall, and probably Cainbre for Tambre is the 
correct reading of the preceding line. 


Page 190, 1. 11. 1 bare lasten. 'In the least (of the wounds),’ as 
mentioned in the line preceding. 26. Avalun. Geoffrey of Monmouth 
twice speaks of the * island of Avalon (Avallon),’ and Wace follows with 
en Vile (T Avalon C Brut,’ 1 . 9,5^6). lu the passage corresponding to this ace 
does not say an island, and Layamon also makes no specific reference to the 
situation of the place, except that Arthur reaches it by sea (191, i). See 
discussions of the place in ‘Romania,' Oct. 1898, and ‘Mod. Lang. Notes, 
XIV 47. 27. Argante. Wace and Geoffrey of Monmouth make no 

mention of this personage. Malory names four, three queens and the Lady of 
the Lake. 30. And seo'K’Se. Wace makes mention of the tradition that 
Arthur should come again, and Layamon, whose more dramatic treatment 
is seen in several places, puts it into the mouth of Arthur himself. 


Page 191, 1. 7. pat wfore. ‘That immeasurable trouble should come (be) 
after (of) Arthur’s death.’ 


III. 'THE LIFE OF SAINT JULIANA’ 

The Middle English prose 'Life of St. Juliana 'is preserved In two MSS., 
Royal 17 A 27 of the British Museum, and Bodleian MS. 34 at Oxford. Of 
these the first is the purest text, and from it our selection is taken. Both MSS. 
weie edited for the Early English Text Society by Cockayne in 1S72 
(EETS., 51), and extracts from both are found in Morris (‘ Specimens,’ I, 96). 
The work was written about 1200, the MSS. themselves being of the first half 
of the thirteenth century. It belongs to the northern part of the Southern 
district, and has certain Midland peculiarities. The language is therefore Sth. 
with Ml. coloring, as explained below. 

The story of St. Juliana has already been told by Cynewulf in an Old English 
poem (cf. Garnett, ‘ The Latin and Anglo-Saxon Juliana,’ Publ. of Mod. Lang. 
Ass., XIV, 279). It also appears, later than our prose version, in a poem of 
long rimed couplets (EETS., 51, 81) similar to those of the ‘Moral Ode,’ as 
also in an unpublished version ; cf. Horstmann, ‘ Altenglische Legenden,’ 
p. xlvif. As to the form of the present 'Life,’ at once noticeable for its 
alliterative and rhythmical character, there is difference of opinion among 
scholars. Ten Brink speaks of the long alliterative line or the rhythmical 
alliterative prose (' Eng, Lit.,’ p. J99). Einenkel undertook to prove that this 
work, together with the similar 'Lives’ of St. Margaret (EETS., 80) and 
St. Katherine (EETS., 13% are in long alliterative lines. From this view 
Schipper dissents (' Grundriss der englischen Melrik,’ p. 75), and I see no reason 
to print otherwise than as prose, though the alliterative and rhythmical elements 
will be clear to any reader. The source of the story is that found in the ' Acta 
Sanctorum’ for P'eb. 16. 

The language of the ‘Juliana,’ like that of the prose ' Lives’ of St. Katherine 
and St. Margaret, is a mixture of Sth. and Ml. ; cf. Morsbach, ' Mittelenglische 
Grammatik,’ § 3, anm. 2 ; § 9, i. The chief Ml. peculiarities are the close 



THE LIFE OF SAINT JULIANA 


303 


instead of open <?s=Goth. <?, WT. a, as in Mercian and the non-Wessex dialects, 
and the preservation of the u and 0 mutations in many cases. In other resp_ects 
the dialect is Southern, as shown especially by e for OE. <?, Ml. and h for 
OE. Besides may be noted the preservation of OE. «, as in the preceding 

early Sth. selections, and the diphthongs eo, ea {ea). The long diphthong 
ea, used for OE. ea or a and certainly a mere graphic representation of ME f, 
has been marked la. No voicing of initial J J>, and r is indicated by the ortho- 
graphy, but unvoicing of final d is common. 

Page 191, 1. 16. In ure. This paragi-aph is preceded by the rubric : Her 
cutnseQ vie of seinie iuliane and ielled of lifla(k hire, ‘ Here commenceth 
the life of Saint Juliana, and (it) telleth of her manner of life.’ Peader, 
The usual foim is the feder - y[\. fader, ant. The usual form in 
this ‘ Life,’ as in the others of the group, so that the sign for and is regularly 
expanded 23. Nichomedes bnrli. Nichomediain Asia Minor, founded 

by Nichomedes I. In the OE. ‘Juliana’ it appears as Commedia. 25. of 
ipe hf pens mfst. ‘ Greatest of the heathen.’ Not in the Latin, and Bodl. MS. 
has a different reading : ‘ Affrican hehte, ]>e heande ~} heascede mest men ])e 
weren cristene. ’ Egge (‘ Mod. Lang. Notes,’ 1, 1 38 ) connects with following clause, 
but I think not rightly. 26. derfliche he droh, MS. derflicho droh. The 
he, subject of drSli, was probably lost by scribal confusion with he of the pre- 
ceding word. 

Page 192, 1. 3. Maximian. Really Galeriiis Valerius Maximinus, made 
emperor in 308, and one of six to claim the title at that time. He renewed the 
persecution of the Christians after Galerius had published an edict of toleration, 
but was soon overthrown by Licinius and died in 314. Here he seems to have 
been confused with Maximian, contemporary emperor of the West, as in the 
OE. poem. Perhaps this is due to the frequent confusion of the Eastern and 
Western Roman empires, as shown also in the next note. 4. PSme. Of 
course Constantinople, or New Rome, in this place. mawmets, MS. 
maumez. The final z is unquestionably equivalent to is, and I have not 
hesitated to expand it as if it were an abbreviation; cf. 195, 22 and note on 
194, 25. 13. ihgndsald. ‘Betrothed wholly against her will.’ 24. as 

me pa luvede. * As they (me) then loved,’ that is, as was the custom of the 
time. into cure pet, MS. ‘ Into a chariot that the powerful rode in, 
or in which,’ &c. Cockayne and Morris retain the MS. and, reading ‘and ride 
into the kingdom.’ I have assumed a phrase descriptive of the chariot, as riche 
‘ kingdom ’ seems inappropriate to a reve. The Bodl. MS. has another descrip- 
tive phrase, i cure up offowr hweoleSf ‘up into a chariot of four wheels.’ 
30. balde hire seolven. As it stands, balde must be a past participle 
modifying JuHane, The Bodl. MS. has a sign for and before se^ide, making 
balde and sende correlative, and this maybe the correct reading. 82. wraSSISi 
sg. ‘Be angry as thou wilt.’ Cf. a similar construction in the third pers. at 
196, 10. 

Page 193, 1. 20. Ich iille, MS. iohulle. The MS. form indicates that the 
two words were spoken in close association, as in the MnE, Sth. dialectal chull, 

‘ I will.’ 27, eis weis. ‘ In any way (ways),’ one of the few examples of 
the inflected adjective in this selection. 

Page 194, 1. 6. Me hwet. ‘ But what,’ The conjunction me, ^ but,’ is 
found especially in Sth, texts, but apparently not in Old Eiiglish or the Anglian 



77. THE SOUTHERN DIALECT 


304 

terrilory. This would argue for the Low German origin suggested for it. 
16. WTimmoii. Note the influence of the preceding upon the original z from 
t in this word, causing it to become u as still preserved in the singular. 
25. mawmets, MS, mawznex. Final x in the latter may^ be 
scribal influence of the preceding word. 28. DSlewsium, Foreign derive 
names retain their original inflexion as here, remain uninflected, or assume tne 
inflexion of English nouns, depending on the frequency of their usage. 

Page 195, 1. 8. dw. A dative which seems redundant to-day, but no doubt 
added force to the expression. It may be translated as a possessive, ‘for your 
evil fortune.' 11. as reve of pe bTirh.e. Since the 'Life' was too long to 
use as a whole, the trial before Eleusius has been omitted and the account 
resumed at the close of the tortures. The intervening part tells how Eleusius 
is again struck with Juliana’s beauty, and how she again repels his advances. 
She is then beaten a second time, hanged by the hair, has boiling brass poured 
over her, and is finally cast into prison. Here a supernatural visitor tempts her, 
but she seizes him and makes him confess he is the devil. She binds him with 
chains and drags him to the judgement seat of the prefect. She is tom to pieces 
on a wheel of spikes, but is made whole by an angel, thus converting the 
executioners. She is thrust into a great fire, but an angel quenches it. 
angers the prefect still more, and at this point the narrative is resumed. 
31. iieldetJ hire 5arew borh. The speech differs here from that in the ' Acta 
Sanctorum/ in which the devil speaks to Eleusius. ^arcw horh seems to be u^d 
ironically, ‘ ready payment ' as if for a debt, the Bodl. text reading ' 5®ldeo hire 
jarow borh efter pat ha wurtJe is.* 

Pago 196, 1. 3. imwiht. Not found in OE. literature, but there is the 
similar untydrCy ‘ monster,* literally ' no child or offspring.’ 8. uppon treowe 
EtalSele. Referring to Matt. vii. 24-27. 24. xinderfeng. Cf. with this im- 

perative onde^:f(ing of Layamon (‘ Brut,’ 11, 168) and undervong oi * Axiz, Riw., 
p. 114. wits meidenes imlaiie. No doubt alluding to Rev. xiv. 3-4. 
Cf. ‘ Pearl,* 1. 1,096 f. 26. p§ fdie engles. See, for an early instance of the 
same, the abcount of the death of Chad in Bede, ‘ Eccl. Hist Bk. IV, ch. iii. 
28. Com a sell wTimmoii. This incident, given in the Greek and Latin lives, 
is omitted by Cynewulf. The name of the woman is variously given as Sophonia 
(Sophronia) and Sophia, the latter by Symeon Metaphrastes the Greek martyro- 
logist. 32. from J)§ sfa 5, mile. In the territory of Puteoli, as stated by 
the first life in the ‘ Acta Sanctorum.* Later (the late sixth century) her remains 
were transferred to Cumae for greater safety. ^ Thence, in 1207, they were said 
to have been taken to Naples, and various cities now claim them, as Brussels 
for example. 

Page 197, 1. 1 . pe reve. In the 'Acta Sanctorum * no mention is made of 
the reeve’s purauing Sophie, and twenty-four, not thirty-four, are destroyed by 
the storm. 4. prittu^e. Both MSS. have the form, though surelyfor }>niiTy 
'thirty/ it would seem. 5. warp ham adriveiL. ‘Cast them, driven about, 
on (to) the land.* The change from plural to singular in the verbs is also found 
in the Bodl. MS. No doubt the general idea of stoma was in the writer’s mind, 
8. pe sixten'^e dei. This is the day on which the Romish church celebrates 
her martyrdom, while the Greek church prefers Dec. 21. 



^ THE ANCREN RIWLE 


305 


IV. ‘THE ANCREN RIWLE, OR RULE OF NUNS’ 

There are five MSS. of the ‘Ancren Riwle,’ Cotton Nero A XIV, Titus D 
XVIII, Cleopatra C VI in the British Museum, Corpus Christi Coll. MS. and 
Cains Coll. MS. 234 at Cambridge. Besides, a fragment of another MS. was 
recently discovered by Napier (* Jour, of Germ. Philology,’ II, 199). The first 
of these, with collation of the second and third, was edited in 1853 for the 
Camden Society by Morton, and selections are found in Morris (‘Specimens,’ I, 
no) and Matzner (‘Sprachproben/ II, 5). Our selection follows Morton’s 
edition with such changes as are necessary by reason of Kolbing’s collation 
with the MS. (‘Jahrbuch fiir rom. und engl. Philologie/ XV, 180). The 
work was written about the beginning of the thirteenth century, in the middle 
part of the Southern district, since it mentions Tarente (Tarent-Kaimes or 
Kingston) near the Stour, in southwest Dorset. Morton suggested (Preface, 
p. xii) that its author may have been Rich. Poor, who was bom at Tarente 
and died there in 1237. He was in turn bishop of Chichester, Salisbury, and 
Durham, and may have been a benefactor of the house since he was sometimes 
called its founder. 

The ‘ Rule of Nuns ’ is a free and not uninteresting treatment of monastic 
duties, prepared for three sisters of good family who had become nuns. It 
consists of a brief introduction and eight parts : of religious service ; keeping 
the heart ; of monastic life ; of temptation ; confession ; penitence ; love ; of 
domestic matters. Of plain and simple style, it contains numerous quotations 
from the Bible and the Chuich Fathers, with allusions to saintly lives but 
practically no legendary or moral tales. The first extract is from Part II 
(Morton, p. 64), dealing with each of the senses in turn ; the second from part 
VIII (Morton, p. 414). 

The language of the ‘ Rule of Nuns* is a pure Southern, and in most respects 
represents the normal form of that dialect, as distinct from the Early Southern 
of the preceding selections. OE. a has now regularly become p, the new diph- 
thongs have developed, and the voicing of initial/ to v is the rule. On the other 
hand, OE. ea ea (fa) still appear as in preceding texts. Occasionally eo 
of this text is equivalent to open |, so that it has in such cases been marked fo. 
Consonant peculiarities are not numerous. The most important is t for initial 
/ after a word ending in t or d, as vort iet (1. 15) for vort J>et; and terefter 
( 1 . 16) for }erefUr, Further see Wiilker in Paul and Braune’s * Beitriige,’ 
I, 209. 

Page 197 , 1 . 14 . Spellumge and smeochunge. Note the retention of the, 
%mge ending of OE. nouns. 

Page 198 , 1 . 1 . J>et he ouh to siggen. Morton connects with preceding 
clause, but it belongs, as Matzner shows, to the following. ‘ (To) that (which) 
he has to say, hearken to his words.* The peculiarity is in the repetition of 
‘ his words.* 12. Parais. Both this and Paradis occur in OF. and ME. 
22. J)e cgve, MS. coue. The word here and in 1 . 24 has been somewhat 
variously read, as the MS. u may be u or v, Morton connects with OE. ceo{Ji), 

* chough,’ but this should appear with ME. ch initially, to say nothing of the 
diphthong, Matzner assumes a Netherland kauw^ {kauw)^ which ought, it 
would seem, to give catie\ cf, MnE. caw. Id. kofa^ ' young pigeon,’ is also not 
^ X 



3o6 n. THE SOUTHERN DIALECT 


easily connected with the word. To account for the form, and preserve the 
play upon the word, I assume OE. caf, ME. used in the first case as a sub- 
stantive adj.j^the swift, the deceitful,* perhaps, ‘'the thief.’ Cumes ie 
* comes the cunning (one)/ of Titus MS. shows the understanding of another 
scribe, and that he had no idea of the chough or any other bird. 

Page 199, 1. 1. Sed muLti veniunt. Matt. vii. 15, the Vulgate for 
which is AUendite a falsis pyopheiis, qui venmnt, 7 . Gabrieles spf che. 
The annunciation, Luke i. 29. 11. oUsr stunde, MS. stude. s 

emendation is proved correct by the Latin text (Magd. Coll., Oxford), which 
conveys the same idea in positive form : si tertius haberi possit. 32. Anere 
and buses Iffdi. ‘ There ought to be much (difference) between an anchoress 
and a housewife/ 

Page 200, 1. 3. swiwike, MS. swilJwike. Matzner suggested retaining 
the MS. reading as OE. equivalent for MLat. hebdomeda maior, though no such 
OE. word is known. On the other hand, we know that OE. s-wigdag, * day of 
silence/ was used for the three days of Holy Week between Thursday evening 
and Sunday morning j cf. .^Elfric’s ‘Homilies,’ I, 218, 31 ; IT, 268, 16. Besides, 
Titus MS. reads swthende wike, and Cleopatra MS. swiwike. The emendation 
therefore seems fully justified. The nuns are advised to make the whole week 
one of silence, rather than the customary three days. 9. Ase Seont An.- 
selme. I have not found the original. 10. chfofled = chfofle’S. Here, 
as occasionally in most texts, is replaced by ^by scribal error ; cf. 201, 

20. Mulieres. r Tim. ii. 1 2 and i Cor. xiv. 34. Neither passage is follovved 
verbatim, the former more nearly. 22. J?e gverkuUre, Morton’s omission 
of pe led Matzner to a wrong understanding of the words. He rightly pointed 
out Morton’s error in connecting this with the following sentence. 27. ase 
ich fr seide. See 199, 31. 31. Ad summam volo. Morton has made 

the strange mistake of including pet is in the quotation as he translates it, and 
omitting uUej &c. pe ende of pe tale is of course a free rendering of ad 
summam. 

Page 201, 1. 5. Censiira. I do not find the exact words here or in 1. 7, 
but a discussion of silence with the figure of the water (201, 8) occurs in 
Gregory’s ‘ Regulae Pastoralis Liber,’ ch. 38 (Migne, 77? 53)* . Mlaria 
optimam. Luke x. 42. The translation begins with the preceding verse. 

Page 202, 1. 15. Bidden hit. * To ask (or beg) i^ in order to give it 
away, is not the part (rihte) of an anchoress.’ 19. on ou. ‘ On yourselves,’ 
that is, Hrom your own wants/ nenne mon. That is, ‘Let no rrian eat 
before you,’ mdkTeS of the preceding clause being understood with this also. 
25. Muche neode. That is, ‘ only much need/ 32. heiward. The hay- 
ward was the keeper of the cattle in the common field or pasture, pd it was his 
duty to prevent trespass on cultivated ground. There was a similar officer of 
the manor or religious house. As the hayward could assess damages against 
the owner of_cattle, a little flattery was evidently considered a good investment, 
hwon me punt hire, ‘ When men impound her (the cow)/ 

Page 203, 1. 1. hwon me makelJ m§ne. ‘ When they (me) make com- 
plaint in town of anchoresses* cattle.’ Probably refers to formal complaint as 
before the town reeve. 



ROBERT OF GLOUCESTER'S ^CHRONICLE 


3^7 


V. ROBERT OF GLOUCESTER’S ‘ CHRONICLE ’—HOW THE 
NORMANS CAME TO ENGLAND 

This metrical Chronicle * is found in an earlier and later form. To the earlier 
belong the following MSS. : Cotton Caligula A XI, Harleian 201, Additional 
19,677 and 18,631 of the British Museum, and Hunterian MS. at Glasgow; 
to the latter, Trinity Coll. MS. R 4, 26 at Cambridge, Digby 205 of the Bod- 
leian, Univ. Library Ee 4, 31 at Cambridge, Lord Mostyn’s Library 259, 
Pepysian Library, Magdalen Coll., Cambridge, 2,014, Sloane 2,027 of the 
British Museum, and Herald’s Coll. MS., London. There are editions by 
Hearne (1724) based on the Harleian MS., and by Wright in the Rolls 
Series (1S87) based on the Cotton MS. above. Extracts are found in Matzner 
(* Sprachproben,’ I, 155), Morris (‘Specimens,’ 11, i), Wiilker (‘Lesebuch,’ I, 
55). The name of the author is based on 1. 11,748, which tells us that 
‘ Robert jiat verst pis boc made’ saw the battle of Evesham (1265), but other- 
wise we know nothing of him. Stow first connected him with Gloucester, and 
this is at least probable. More recently Strohmeyer ( * D.as V erhaltnis der lids, 
der Reimchronik Roberts von Gloucester,’ ‘Archiv fiir neuere Sprachen,’ 
LXXXVII, 217) shows that the ‘Chronicle’ is the work of three different 
authors, the first writing about the end of the thirteenth century lines i-p, 137, 
the second (Robert of 1. 11,748) lines 9,138-12,049, and a third writing and 
somewhat extending the later version. As the work mentions the canonization 
of St. Louis in 1297, it could not have been written before that event, and was 
probably composed about 1300 in Gloucester. The language is therefore 
Southern of that district about the last of the thirteenth century. Our selection 
is from Cotton Caligula A XI, the purest text, and consists of 11. 7# 395-7,5 13 
as printed by W^'right above. 

The ‘Gloucester Chronicle’ relatestbe history of England from the legendary 
Brutus to 1271. It contains about 12,000 long lines (12,600 in the later 
version), riming in couplets. As to the number of stresses the lines are suffi- 
ciently irregular to occasion considerable difference of opinion. They seem to 
be based on the line of seven stresses with caesura after the fourth, but many 
lines occur with only six stresses. The sources of the poem are Geoffrey 
of Monmouth, Henry of Huntingdon, William of Malmesbury, and other 
chroniclers. 

The language of the ‘ Chronicle ’ is some three-quarters of a century later 
than that of the ‘Ancren Riwle.’ The OE. diphthongs have entirely disappeared 
even from the orthography, and the language is therefore typical Southern in 
most respects. Among vowels there is a largely increased use of 0 for u. 
Among consonants the selection often shows loss of initial /^, and a frequent 
voicing of hzv to w which is parallel to some extent with that of initial f to v. 
Besides ss (j) regularly represents sh. 

Page 203, 1. 14. hap. Note the unusually frequent omission of inicial h in 
this text. 15. her and |r. Other MSS., as Harleian 201, read her and fier, 

‘ here and there,’ perhaps a better reading. On the other hand, her is constantly 
used, especially in the Chronicles, for ‘ now, at this time,’ and J>ir may be due 
to a scribal misunderstanding of her in this sense. 17. Verst. Strict Sth. 
would require vUrst^ but e iov u is found in a few words in this writer. See 
heme (Jieme) 204, 8 for Sth. hume^ Wt the latter in rime (204, 18), and 
cf. Morsbach, ‘ Mittelengl. Gram.,’ § 133, anm. 2. 



77. THE SOUTHERN DIALECT 


308 

Page 204, 1. 1. As pe hende. ^As the courteous one,’ so ‘politely, 
courteously.’ 3. J)§ grft© gp. See Freeman’s ‘Norman Conquest, 
III, 91. 14. pat was al. The Harleian MS. reads > after ‘that 

then was,* &c., but it seems no material improvement.^ 27. Godwiue. 
The crime was attributed to Godwine, though committed by follc^ers 
of Harold I. William now gives this as a reason for making war on God- 
wine’s son Harold. 28. Alfred. The brother of Edward the Confessor, 
son of ^thelred II and Emma of Normandy, the latter sister of William the 
Conqueror’s grandfather, Cosm is therefore very freely used, as often in earlier 
English and sometimes to-day. On Alfred’s return to England from Normandy 
in 1036 he was seized, his followers killed or enslaved, and his eyes torn out at 
Ely. 31. Ssint Edward. Edward the Confessor, who had promised the 
throne to William, so the latter said. That he was ‘ next of his bldd * (1. 32) 
was of course true. 

Page 205, 1. 13. Sein Walri. This is St. VaUry at the mouth of the 
Somme, with w for OF. z', as in Wace’s Wahrt* 14. and abide mp. We 
should expect a sing. pret. to agree with -wendej kadde^ but the construction 
certainly changes in the following clauses, and there is no reason to suppose it 
may not here. Otherwise we must assume an infin., with an omitted to ov for 
to expressing purpose. 21. On* of his kni^tss. The well-known story of 
William’s stumbling as he set foot on the land is here omitted entirely. The 
words of the knight therefore lose point. 

Page 203, 1. 2. As he of ng men. ‘ As if he took account of no man.’ 
4. pe oper bataile. The battle of Stamford Bridge, Yorkshire, September 25, 
10^, in which Harold had defeated and killed King Harold of Norway. 
10. pat upe be Popes. ‘ That he should rest (dff) it upon the judgement 
{idkinge) of the Pope.* 13. him take np Ipnd. ‘ Give or deliver him no 
land.’ For this sense of take{n) se6 the use of Mtdke{n\ 12. Wfr Seint 
Edward. Morris suggests * whether,* and Matzner ‘ if* for wer . But the 
meaning is rather ‘notwithstanding, although.* 27. mi fader. Really his 
ancestor Rollo, first Duke of Normandy, in the early tenth century, or a hundied 
and fifty years befoie. 31. Kichard. This was Richard the Fearless, who 
reigned from 943 to 996. The French king who was taken prisoner was Lewis 
(Louis) IV, 

Page 207, 1. 7. he overedm. There are numerous references to this 
story in the chroniclers. See also Uhland’s poems on the subject. 31. Wip 
strpnge targes. OE. poems often refer to making a ‘war-hedge,* or close 
protection of overlapping shields before the men. No doubt this custom is 
intended here, dude horn no^t, * did them no harm,* 

Page 208, 1. 14. np wille habbe. ‘ Have no chance (wiUe) of striking 
{dUntf 17. al vor rL03t. A phrase of varying import, ‘ all in vain, all for 
nothing.* Here it seems to imply lack of resistance, and so ‘ easily.’ 

Page 209, 1. 15. gpstes, See Freeman’s ‘Norman Conquest,* III, ir. 
19. Seint Calixtes day. October 14, when Pope Calixtus is supposed to have 
been martyred in 222, 81- WTillam hit send© hire. This is a mistake. 

Harold*s mother offered a large sum for the body, but William would not give 
it up and had it privately buried by the sea-shore, so that the grave could not 
be identified; cf. Ramsey, ‘ Foundations of England,* II, 35 f. 



OLD KENTISH SERMONS 


309 


Page 210, 1. 20. Vor ]?e in§re. This line shows that the writer had no 
strong feeling either for or against the conditions he mentions. The antipathy 
of the races had long passed away. 


VI. OLD KENTISH SERMONS 

These * Sermons’ are found in Laud MS. 471 of the Bodleian Library, Oxford, 
and were printed by Morris in ‘ An Old English Miscellany ’ (EETS., 49), p. 26. 
They represent Kentish of about 1 250, so that they really precede in time the 
previous selection, but are placed here to bring together the two specimens of 
Kentish in the book. 

But five of these sermons are preserved, all brief and simple in plan. They 
are translations from the French of Maurice de Sully (d. 1196), the earliest 
French sermon W'riter to give up Latin for the vernacular. They all follow the 
same general plan of text, narrative, exposition, application, as exemplified in 
the fourth and fifth, here printed. 

An outline of Kentish giammar is given by Morris in the Introduction to the 
volume quoted above, and more completely in the Introduction to * Ayenbite of 
Inwit.* The characteristic mark of Middle Kentish is the retention of Old 
Kentish e, i for non-Kentish y\ cf. prede (211, 20), Ipeks (211, 23). 
Besides, Kentish agrees with the non-Wessex dialects of Old English in having 
e for T. /, WT. 5, WS. and e, te for /-mutation of OE. ea^ eo, while it is 
itself peculiar in having e for non-Kentish a by /-mutation of d. It has also 
the diphthongs {Jo) beside for WS. ea or lengthened ea^ and au from OE. 
aw. The special treatise on Kentish of the Middle English period is by 
Danker, 'Die Laut- und Flexionslehre der mittelkentischen Denkmaler’ 
(1879). 

Page 210, 1. 24. godspelle of todai. This is indicated by the Latin rubric, 
Donimica quart a post octavam Epiphanie, and the gospel is Matt, viii. 23f. 
Apait from slight lack of \eibal agreement with the Vulgate, the last clause is 
from Mark vi. 48, and no doubt suggests a gospel haimony as the basis. 

Page 211, 1. 15. blepeliohe. This form of the word also appears regu- 
larly in 'Ayenbite of Inwit.* As the OE. word is blzpelice not blyPelice, the 
first e may be short or lengthened from a short e which took the place of 
shortened /. 16. Salus populi. Hardly a quotation from any one passage 

of Scripture, certainly not from Christ’s words. It may have come from one 
or more Psalms which were regarded as messianic ; cf. Ps. xxxv. 3 ; and for 
the last part xviii. 6; 1. 15; Ixxxvi. 7; cxviii. 5. 24. wcrdle. The pre- 

vailing form in Kt., as shown by the next selection. 26. Quod ipse pre- 
stare. An expression used as a benediction and closing, qui vivit et reptat 
Deus per omnia secula sectilorum. But it has various forms. 29. gode- 
spelle. Lat. rubric, Dominica in sexagesima ; gospel. Matt. xiii. 24. 

Page 214, 1. 13. ngn man w-gt. The preacher quotes very freely as 
before. Reference seems to be to the interpretation of such passages as Matt, 
xxiv. 36, 42; Luke xii. 19-20. 14. for man. A common proverb, cf. 

'Ancren Riwle,* p. 338 ; ‘ Ayenbite of Inwit* (Morris), p. 129. A poem on 
long life (' Old Eng. Misc.,* p. 156) begins : 

'Mon mai longe lives wene, 

Ac ofte him lie® ]?e wrench.’ 



310 


//. THE SOUTHERN DIALECT 



VII. ‘THE AYENBITE OF INWIT, OR REMORSE OF 
CONSCIENCE ’ 

This work, in the handwriting of the author, is contained in Arundel MS. 57 
of the British Museum. It was edited by Stevenson in 1855 and by Moms for 

- . rt • . /-KT^ tOAK 'K'vfT-o/sfcf in 

the Early 
Matzner I 

buch/ I, 1121. me auuiui jjivca «« — - - — -- - - - 

gate (Kent), tells ns that he was an Augustine monk of Canterbury, and that 
he finished the ‘Remorse of Conscience* in 1340. His language therefore 
represents Kentish of the first half of the fourteenth century, about three-quarters 
of a century later than the preceding selection, and a quarter of a century later 

than the ‘ Gloucester Chronicle.’ ^ ^ yr l , r 

The work is a translation of ‘ La Somme des Vices et dcs V^tus by Lorens, 
a Benedictine monk of the later thirteenth century. It treats of the ten command- 
ments, the twelve articles of faith, the seven deadly sins, &c., with occasional illus- 
trative tales, anecdotes, or lives of saints. It is strongly allegorical throughout, 
but the style is not as pleasing as that of the ‘ Ancren Riwle,’ or as simple as 
that of the ‘ Kentish Sermons? Our selection, ‘ How to learn to die,’ is based 
on the text of Morris above (p. 70 f.), where it begins the more constnictive 
teaching of the book. Special monographs on the work are by Vamhagen, 
‘ Beitrage zur Erklaning und Textkritik* (‘ Eng. Stud.,’ I, 379 5 ^ 7 ) J 

Evers, dissertation with same title (1888) ; by Konrath, ‘ Die lateinische 
Quelle zu Ayenbite' (‘Eng. Stud.,’ XII, 459). . . , 

In Notes to ‘Old Kentish Sermons’ reference was made to the principal 
treatises on the Kentish dialect, and to important peculiarities. In the present 
selection are to be noticed ea (pa, yea) for WS. ea or lengthened ea, and uo for 
OE. ME. o (f) sometimes ; di, guodes ^ godes ( 216 , 22); gno ^ gg ( 218 , 32). 
Among consonants z is regularly written for voiced .r, clearly indicating the 
voicing of the latter when initial as well as when medial between vowels. 

Page 215 , 1 . 18 . rapre panne ssed. The figuie is a common one in 
Scripture; cf. 2 Chron. xxix. 15 ; Job viii. 9; xiv. 2 ; Ps. cii. ii ; cix. 23. 


Page 216 , 1 . 15 . p© “wyse Catoun, Presumably Dionysius Cato, whose 
‘ Disticha’ were so highly regarded in the middle ages. Nothing exactly like 
this occurs, but for contempt of death see ‘ Disticha ’ at I, 22, IV, 22, 21. pci 

dyeapes. Another interpretation of the three deaths occurs in ‘ Old Eng. 
Homilies,’ II, 169. 29 . damezel© Bfreblisse. Explained in the following 

clause, ‘ death that crowns and places (dop) in bliss all the saints.’ For a name 
made in the same way cf. 161 , 0. 

Page 218 , 1 . 7 . to p© reward of. ‘ In respect of or to.’ Reward has 
the' sense of ‘ regard,’ the cognate word, 20 . as© zayp Salomon. Prov. 
XXIV. 16, which reads in the Vulgate, Septies eniin cadet iustus, et resurget. 


Page 219 , 1 . 2. per ne may guo in.’ Referring to Rev. xxi. 27 ; cf. 1 . 32. 
15 . mgre stranger. The double comparative appears thus early. 



HIGDEN^S * POLYCHRONJCON 


3^1 


VIII. TREVISA’S TRANSLATION OF HIGDEN’S 
' POLYCHRONICON ’ 

The English * Polychronicon ’ of Trevisa is preserved in at least four MSS., 
St. John’s Coll. H I at Cambridge, and Cotton Tiberius D VII, Harleian 
1,900, Additional 24,194 of the British Museum. Of these the first 'was printed 
by Caxton in 1482, and with a later version (Harl. MS, 2261) was edited by 
Babington for the Rolls Series. Extracts from Trevisa are found in Matzner 

Sprachproben/ II, 343), Morris (‘ Specimens,’ II, 235'), and Wiilker (^Lese- 
buch,’ II, 205). Our selection is from Cotton Tiberius D VIT, a contemporary 
MS, in pure Southern. The translator, John T re'visa, was vicar at Berkeley, then 
canon at Westbury, Gloucestershire. He finished his translation in April 1387, 
as he tells us. The language is therefore Southern of Gloucestershire in the last 
half of the fourteenth century. 

The ^ Polychronicon ’ was originally written in Latin by Radulphus or 
Ranulphus Higden of Chester. As the name implies, the work is a sort of 
history of the world, brought down to the year 1342. This Trevisa translated 
freely, adding here and there, and extending to 1387. Besides this he is 
supposed to have translated other works, though these cannot be proved to be 
his with certainty. 

As to language, Trevisa’s Southern shows no voicing of initial /, and j, so 
far as orthography is concerned, but otherwise well represents the dialect. The 
selection shows a for hn {ha), beside hi {hy), in the plural of the third personal 
pronoun; cf. * Juliana,’ p. 19 1. 

Page 220 , 1 . 1. pe 5f r of Hely.. The mediaeval historians were fond of 
such union of sacred and secular history, and it was natural to their annalistic 
form of Mstorical writing. 7 . Vespasian hys tyme. That is 69-79 

Pictes <i«.t of Scitia. This tradition appears in numerous chroniclers back 
to Bede. That the Piets entered Britain later than the Britons is probably true 
enough. Cf. 221 , 6. 17 . Tn Vespasian. Based on Geoffrey of Monmouth, 

as the footnote shows. This accounts for many statements of which authentic 
history gives no confirmation. 18 . Marius. Geoffrey of Monmouth, * Hist. 
Brit.,’ IV, ch. xvii. Arviragus, his father, is mentioned in ch. xiii f, but neither 
is known to be historical, though Geoffrey connects them with the Roman 
emperors, as here. The same may be said of Rodric in the same line. 
21 . Oathenesia. The present Caithness doubtless. 

Page 221 , 1 . 4 . Servius. The commentator on Virgil, who lived in the 
last of the fourth and beginning of the fifth centuiy, the time of Jerome and 
'Augustine. 5 . Agatirses. Cf. ‘Aeneid,’ IV, 146, where occurs picti Aga^ 
thyrsi^ giving rise to the comment of Servius. 12. Maximus. The chronicler 
has here confused Magnus Clemens Maximus (383-388) with Maximus Tyrannus 
(408-411), as shown by the references to Gratianus and Valentinianus in 1 . 14. 
He has also mistaken the name Tyrannus for a descriptive title. Marius is 
mentioned, not by Geoffrey but by Gildas. 21. Oarausius. Mentioned by 
Geoffrey, ‘ Hist. Brit.,’ V, ch. iii, . Bassiauus. Better known as Caracalla. 
Geoffrey recounts the death of Geta as in battle between the brothers for 
supremacy in the empire. 27 . pwart^ver wal. The wall of Hadrian from 
Newcastle to Carlisle and the Solway Firth, here called the Scottysch, that is, 



313 


11. THE SOUTHERN DIALECT 


the Iiish sea. So also at 222 , a and 22. 28 . Lodovia. Trevisa seems 

to have misread the Latin Lodoneya, which he should have translated by 
‘Lodonia (Loudonia), London.’ SO. BTiuian. Lede gives the tradition 
regarding Ninias or Nynian (‘Eccl. Hist.,’ Ill, iv), but hts date cannot 
be definitely fixed. He is said to have died in 43a. 31 . Brenioia. Beremcia, 

founded according to Bede in 547 A. D. 


Page 222 , 1 . 8. Puk Eeuda. In his edition of Bede, Plummer says the 
northern portion of County Antrim, Ireland, was called Bal Riada, after an 
ancient leader who is supposed to have died in 165 A.D. Thence the name 
was transferred to Britain with an Irish colony. 


Page 223 , 1 . 2 . Plemmyngs. In iiii Henry I established a colony of 
this people in Pembrokeshire, Southwest Wales. 11 . J)e Danes. Reference 
is doubtless to the massacre on St. Brice’s day, 1002; cf. Freeman, ‘Norm. 
Conquest/ I, 182, 31-2 f, 634 f. 

Page 224 , 1 . 7 . drawe somwhat. An early reco^ition, perhaps, of words 
borrowed from the Celts. 26 . pya manere. This whole paragraph is an 
addition to his original by Trevisa himself, and is naturally of greatest interest 
as a contemporary account. pe furste moreyn. The great plague of 
1348-9. ‘ A second occurred in 1361-2, a third in 1369, and some reckon a 
fourth in 1375-6. 27 . Jgliaii Cornwal . . . Kichard Pencrycli. Both 

Comishmen, as it would seem from their names. It is not improbable that they 
were both at Oxford, as was Trevisa, for the name Master John Cornwall appears 
in the records of Merton College, and the names Pencrych (Penkrissh) and 
Pencrych Hall are also found. The latter was about opposite Niinne Hall, 
where Cornwall taught. See Stevenson’s article on the ‘ Introduction of English 
in English Schools’ in ‘ An English Miscellany/ p. 421. 

Page 226 , 1 . 1 . of pe seeunde Kyng Bichard . . . nyne. The ninth 
year of Richard II began June 22, 1385,50 that this part must have been written 
in the last half of that year. 6. disavauntage. This shows that Trevisa 
was not in the least prejudiced against French, when properly added to a know- 
ledge of the mother tongue. Cf. Robert of Gloucester at 210 , 19, 20. 
11. grft wonder. Trevisa was scarcely more in the dark than many a later 
historian of our language. Of course the changes in spoken English were due 
to an unconscious variation in different districts, while pS Igngage of Normandy 
— ^that is French in general— was taught and learned, with some idea of a 
normal or standard form. Had Trevisa been more widely acquainted with the 
French as was Chaucer, he would have known that there was some variation as 
spoken in England and on the continent ; cf. what Chaucer says of the Prioress, 
Prologue to ‘ Cant. Tales,’ 124 f. 28 . bycause pat pe kynges. Just what 
influence Trevisa supposed the kings to have had is not clear, but the relation 
of the capital city and the center of government to the development of a standard 
language is well known. 



THE DIALECT OF LONDON 


The importance of the language of the capital city to the development of 
standard English has led to the placing of four selections from London 
English in this place. A comparison of these will show how the language 
gradually changed, in most particulars, from Southern to Midland. 

I. THE ENGLISH PROCLAMATION OF HENRY III 

This proclamation occurs in two MSS., one in the Public Record Office, 
London, and the other in the Bodleian Library, Oxford. The first of these 
was published by Rymer (i8i6), by Ellis in * Transactions of the Philological 
Society* (1868), and by Matzner (‘ Sprachproben,’ II, 54), The second was 
printed in ‘Memorials of Oxford’ by J. Ingram (1S57), by Skeat in 
‘Transactions of the Philological Society’ (1880-1), Our text follows the 
first. As indicated, the ‘Proclamation’ was issued Oct. 18, 125S, so that we 
have here the English of some London scribe in the middle of the thirteenth 
century. 

This ‘ Proclamation ’ is the earliest in English, after the disuse of the latter 
in public documents following the Norman Conquest; cf. the author’s 
‘ History of the English Language,’ ch. v. It was issued to confirm to the 
people the ‘ Provisions of Oxford,’ a charter of rights which had been wrested 
from the king. As indicated at the end, a copy was sent to every shire in 
England and to Ireland. The copy we print indicates Huntingdonshire as 
its destination, as that of the Bodleian indicates Oxfordshire. The writ was 
issued in both French and fenglish; cf, the French version in Ellis’s edition. 
For the ‘ Provisions ’ themselves, which accompanied this Proclamation, see 
Stubbs’s ‘ Select Charters ’ ; Adams and Stevens’s ‘ Select Documents of Eng- 
lish Constitutional History,’ I, 56, 

The language of this selection shows the use of the OE. diphthongs eoy eo^ 
ea, and the ligatures <b^ as in Southern texts of the same period ; cf. the 
‘ Ancren Riwle ’ with the Midland ‘ Genesis and Exodus.’ To these are 
added the digraph oa, probably an early writing of ME. g from OE. In 
other respects the language shows a mixture of Southern and Midland, prob- 
ably characteristic of London English of the time. True Southern forms are 
those with u = OE. J/, those with the prefix i (OE. ge)^ and such verbal 
forms as bco}^ halbed, maklen ; besides these the older inflexional forms, as 
fan Gade, loande, and the noun plurals in en^ as warden. For 

a fuller consideration of the language of this ‘Proclamation’ cf. Morsbach, 

‘ Schriftsprache,’ p. ifii. 

Page 226, 1. 1. Godes faltume. For the OF. far le grace Deu^ 

Lat dei gratia. 3 . send -•=! sendetJ. 4 , witen 2©. The subjunctive 

of mild command. willen and nnnen. Note the present plurals in 



3^4 


II. THE DIALECT OF LONDON 


en. Ml. forms, and compare the Sth. beo) (1. 5), haibet (1. i)- 5. uxe 

r8§d.esmeii. Reference is made no doubt to the Committee of Twenty-four, 
twelve elected by the barons and twelve by the king, who had drawn up the 
‘Provisions’ in the Oxford session. 24. Boneface. No special note is 
necessary on these prominent men of the time. Thirteen sign here, ^^^een 
the corresponding French translation. The same thirteen in the Oxford 
copy, in the same order, probably indicates, as Skeat emphasized from another 
circumstance, that all the copies were alike in this respect. 

Page 227,1. 8. And al on. This part does not occur in the Oxford copy. 
It suggests that we may have before us the original, on which this note was 
made for general reference. 9. pSre kiineriche. Note the peculiar use 
of the feminine form of the pronoun with a noun originally neuter. 


IL ADAM DAVY’S DREAMS ABOUT EDWARD II 

This text is found in Laud MS. 622 at the Bodleian Library, Oxford, and 
was edited by Fumivall for the Early English Text Society (69) in 1S78. 
The ‘Dreams’ were written between 1307 and 1327, probably soon after the 
accession of the king. Of Adam Davy, the author, little is certainly known 
beyond what he tells us in his verses; cf- the ‘Diet, of Nat. Biography. 
The ‘ Dreams ’ have no special literary value, but are important as exhibiting 
the language of the capital city. Their puipose was doubtless to obtain 
favor of the king. Certainly, that Edward II should be ‘ emperor in Cristen- 
dom ’ (229, 33) could hardly have been expected long after his troublous 
reign began. 

The diange of the language of London from a mixture of Southern and 
Midland toward pure Midland is very evident in this selection. The notable 
Sth. characteristics are wanting, as «, u for OE./,/, though the Sth. open f 
(WS. Merc. /) still prevails. Similarly the indicative present plural of 
verbs ends in the Midland en, not Sth. e} {eih). Forms with the Sth. prefix i 
OE. ge, are not numerous. Even at the beginning of the fourteenth 
^ntuiy, therefore, the language of London was* closely approximating the 
Midland dialect of Chaucer. 

Page 227, 1. 15. Prince of Wales. This title, coupled with that of 
king in the preceding line, shows that the ‘ Dreams ’ relate to Edward II, the 
first to possess the former title and the only one of the Edwards of the 
fourteenth century to be both prince and king. 20. Seint Edward. 
Edward the Confessor, commemorated on Jan. 5, though the title might apply 
to the second Saxon king of that name. 

Page 228, 1. 21. pe decollacioun of Seint Jgn. The beheading of John 
is commemorated on Aug, 29. 28. pe ffst of alle halewen. All Saints* 

day, Nov. 1. 

Page 229, 1. 21. pe day of Seint Lucie. That is, Dec. 1 3, 

Page 230, 1. 5. worpingni^ht. This has not been identified, but would 
seem, from the chronological order followed, to fall between All Saints and 
Lent. The only analogous compound in OE, is dcegweorjiing, ‘celebration, 
festival,’ but this does not assist us unless worJ>ingni^ht could be some very 
important festival as, perhaps, the ‘ PurificatiQn of the Virgin/ Feb. 2. 



FIRST ENGLISH PETITION TO PARLIAMENT 315 


Page 231, 1. 2. in clfn© leinte. Already the old word for spring 
(OE. lengterC) has b^n specialized to the clerical nse, as in modem English. 
20. f>e bfryng of our Iiffdy. The birth of the Virgin Mary, commemorated 
on Sept. 8. 29. For me ne worpe. 'On account of me/ 'nor shall be 

(shewed) to learned or unlearned.* 


III. THE FIRST PETITION TO PARLIAMENT IN ENGLISH 

This ' Petition ’ is preserved in a MS. of the Public Record Office, London. 
It was printed, quite imperfectly, in 'Rolls of Parliament,* III, 225, and later 
by Morsbach in ' Neuenglische Scliriftsprache,* p. 1 7 1 . As it bears the date 
1386, the language is London English of the last quarter of the fourteenth 
century. Apart from its linguistic value the ' Petition ’ is highly interesting as 
giving us a most vivid conception of municipal politics in early London. 
The language presents few peculiarities, and these will be readily understood 
from the previous readings. The sentence structure hardly suggests one 
accustomed to the pen, and the document may easily have been composed by 
some clerk of the Mercery. 

Page 232, 1. 21. as a membre. One of the twelve great Livery Com-* 
panies of the city, and having an important place in the government. 
22. wxgnges subtiles. Note the OF. adjective following the noun and 
taking the plural form, no doubt a documentary usage rather than one 
colloquially common at the time. 24. is to b© to. 'Is to be by* or 
‘belongs to,* -as we should say. 25. at 9 day. The Anglo-French text 
reads : chesctin an le jour de Seint Edward le Roj/, that is, Jan. 5 ; cf. note on 
227, 20. 

Page 233, 1. 1. Nicholus Brembre. A member of the Grocers’ Company 
and chief supporter among the people of Richard II, Brembre became mayor 
in 1383-4 by forcible means as narrated. In 1386 he secured the election of 
his accomplice Nicholas Exton (234, 25), and he himself became a councillor 
of the king. In the next year he was charged with treason and fled to Wales. 
He was brought back and hanged in London in 1388, 2. Jfhn. Northamp- 

ton. Also called Combertcn. He was leader of the faction supporting 
Wyclif and itself supported by John of Gaunt, Elected mayor in 1381, for 
two years he was imprisoned in 1384 by Brembre, but was released in 1387 and 
fully restored to London citizenship in 1390. 13. her mair. While the 

preceding np man is sing., it implies the pi. and accounts for the plural 
pronoun. 14. of his ordynaunce. The Anglo-French text leads : jar son 
assent f ' of his assent or party,’ explaining the passage. 15. grfte quantitee 
of armure. This passage is a wonderful revelation of the political methods 
sometimes employed at this time in the freest and most powerful city of 
England. 17. ofwithinne. Those of the city, besides the 'straungers 
of. the contre.’ 27. of -whpmsg it wfre. 'Of whatsoever it might be.* 

The w/ipm is dat.-acc., the older dat. of the neuter w^at. 28. and it 
wfre. ' If it were.* Morsbach adds (?/) after andj but this seems unnecessary 
as shown by the punctuation. 

Page 234, 1. 10. tyme out of mynde. That was omitted by 
mistake is clear from the Anglo-French text, del iemjs dount nuUe memoire 



3i6 


II, THE DIALECT OF LONDON 


iu court. 11. -wolden. A subject we, whicli may have been omitted by 
the scribe, is implied in ‘the Mercerye or ©there craftes’ above. Or perhaps 
the writer intended another construction connected with the clause beginning 
-^(1.8). 17. the whioh thyng lyk© to yowre. ‘ {the whzch thyng) 

may it please your worthy lordship to be proved or disproved^ that truth may 
show which of the two {the whether) (is correct).* Here and several times the 
word lordship is an abstract, used instead of the plural but implying all the 
lords in council. 24. for thei. "So that (for) they should not be known 
or continued,* equivalent to ‘ lest they should be known and continued. 
25. ISTioholus Exton. Made mayor in 1386 by Brembre and his party.- As 
here accused, he is said to have publicly burnt a book of good customs called 
the ‘Jubilee.’ This event marks the revival of the party of Northampton 
in the city. 80. which of us . . . the Kyng sholde do hym. Note the 
anacoluthon. Brembre made a charge of being false to the king, and then 
offered immunity to any who would admit the charge, hoping thus to gain 
a good witness for his case. 82. and if any. Note the indicative in the 
condition, perhaps in emphasis of the reality of the case. ' 

Page 235, 1. 3. the mair that now is. That is, Exton, mentioned above. 
8, there men. ‘ Where men,’ implying also ‘ because.' 13. bi suggestion. 
This seems to imply that the offer by Brembre (234, 30) had been accepted by 
some, who had thus shielded themselves from punishment in other particulars. 
16. to ben used. The senseis : "your lord’s command is too great a thing to 
be used familiarly among or toward simple men, lest they, because of their 
ignorance in obeying it (unwyse id save 2/),* &c. 24. brer© or Brembre. 

To understand the play upon the name it must be remembered that our word 
bra 77 ible had, in both Old and Middle English, a form brcmber, < For this 
period cf. hremher-flour (Harl. MS. of Chaucer) for bremhehjiour of the 
received text. 27. the which. "Which being granted by your lordship’.; 
that is, what is implied in that clause (1. 29). 30. as ampng us. ‘ Among 

ourselves.’ 

Pag© 236, 1. 2. vittailers. Brembre’s party ‘had its strength among 
the . . . grocers, then dominant, and the fishmongers, whose monopoly it 
upheld against the claims of the populace,’ — ‘ Diet, of Nat. Biog.,’ Brembre. 
28. in thS sexte yfre. That is, in 1384. 


IV. CHAUCER’S ‘CANTERBURY TALES’ 

It is needless to give details regarding the Chaucer MSS., or the numerous 
editions of his works. , The extract is from the Ellesmere MS. as reprinted by 
the Chaucer Society, except for the few changes indicated in the footnotes. 
Nor is it necessary to say much of place and language, since every detail of this 
sort is so easily accessible. It will be generally admitted that the ‘Pardoner’s 
Tale’ represents London English, in the last decade of the fourteenth century, 
that is, somewhat later than the time of the last selection. 

For the originals of the story, so far as known, see the account in Skeat’s 
‘ Chaucer,’ III, 439 f. For Chaucer’s language it is scarcely necessary to 
give special references, as to Ten Brink’s ‘ Chaucer’s Sprache und Versktrost* 



CHAUCER^S * CANTERBURY TALES ^ 317 

(trans. as the ‘ Language and Metre of Chaucer’), and the numerous introductory 
treatises giving two or three Tales with grammar, &c. 

Page 237, 1. 7. In Plaundres. The place was perhaps so indicated in 
the original form of the story which Chaucer used, 18 . they totfre. One 
of the best illustrative passages is from the ‘Parson’s Tale’: ‘ For Cristes sake 
ne swereth nat so sinfully, in dismembringe of Crist by soule, herte, bones, and 
body. For certes it seemeth that ye thinke that the cursede Jewes ne dis- 
merabred nat ynough the preciouse persone of Crist, but ye dismembre him 
more.’ 

Page 238, 1 . 2. luxurie is = luxuri *s. The Scriptural passage (Eph. v. 
18) reads in the Vulgate Nolite inebriari vinOy in qtio est luxuria. As the 
passage is quoted by Innocent III in ‘ De Contemptu Mundi,’ which Chaucer 
translated, he may have taken it from that source. 6. the stgries. Reference 
is to the ‘ Historia Scholastica ’ of Petrus Comestor, called ‘ clerke of the stories ’ 
in ‘ Piers Plowman,’ B VII, 73, and ‘ maister of storyies ’ by Lydgate. The 
plural is used because each of several parts of the work is called ‘ Historia.’ 
The clause then means ‘ whoso has well perused the stories. ' 10. Senek 

seith §§k. Tyrwhitt suggested Seneca’s Epistles Ixxxiii : Exienda in plures 
dies ilhim ahrii habitum ; numquid furore dubitabis ^ nunc quoque non est 
minor, sed brevior? 14 . fallen in a shrewe. ‘ Fallen on a shrew or evil 
person.’ 18 . 9 original. The line is metrically complete without 0 , which 
may have intmded from the preceding lines. 22 . Corrupt was. Cf. the 
* Parson’s Tale,’ § 70 : * This sinne (glottony) corrumped al this world, as is wel 
shewed in the sinne of Adam and Eve.’ 80 . 9 glotonye. The original of 
this (Ecclus. xxxvii. 32) was quoted by Innocent III in ‘ De Contemptu Mundi.’ 

Page 239 , 1 . 2. a belle. The custom of the time as shown by the 
direction of Myrc, ‘ Instructions for Parish Priests,’ 1 . 1,964 : 

‘Make ]>y clerk before ])e 5ynge, 

To here ly5t and belle rynge.* 

4 . That ppn of hem. MnE. ‘ one of them’ rather than ‘the one’ ; t/iat is 
the old demonstrative with t retained before a vowel. Cf. the ign, the tother. 
17. this pestilence. This shows that the story is placed in the time of one 
of the great plagues which swept western Europe, perhaps that of 1348-9, the 
worst of all. 84 . al 9nes. The usual expression is at gnes, or al at gnes. 

Page 24 : 0 , I. 19 . God yow see, Cf. ‘Cant. Tales’ B 156, D 2,169; 

‘ Troilus,’ II, 85, Cod you save and see* While the corresponding OE. word 
seems not to have the meaning of ‘ protect,’ that is found in the case of the 
corresponding ON. fonn. 20. Tnde. Taken as an example of the far 
distant land. Sometimes Greece is used in the same way. 81 . Ne d§gth. 
As Prof. Kittredge pointed out, the next seven lines are imitated from the first 
elegy of Maximian ; cf. Skeat’s ‘ Chaucer,’ v, 287. 

Page 241 , 1 . 5 . my cheste. That in which his worldly belongings were 
kept ; usually found in old times at the foot of the bed in the bed-chamber. 
13 . In hpply writ. Lev, xix. 32; in the Vulgate, Coram cano capita 
consurge. 17 . did. ‘Should do’; subj. mode. 

Page 242 , 1 . 31 . the cut. The shortest, as in a fuller account of a drawing 
of cuts in the Prologue, 835-845. 



3i8 


II. THE DIALECT OF LONDON 


Page 244, 1. 6. at cure owene wille. ‘ According to our ovvn pleasure,’ 
a common idiom. 19. Porwhy the feend. Cf. ‘OE. Homilies,’ II, 39 
(EETS., 53) : ^ Swa give?? lire Drib ten leve fe devle to ben on ])e swinisshe men 
Je ihc er of spec, and on hem to wuniende and hem to drenchende, and of here 
wit to bringinde and to driven fram nnrihtw to oSer, fram e??eliche laste to 
michele, fram synne to synne, fram ivele to ivele, and et tan ande hem drenche'S 
on shameliche de?ye and mid hem to helle lede^S.’ 

Page 245, 1.^ 6 . gggn apaas. The first part of the last word is not the 
article, as sometimes explained, but a— on. The expression means go on foot, 
and is thus indicative of the time required for such travel. 29. canon . . . fen. 
The work of Avicenna (Ibn-Sina) is called ' Book of the Canon in Medicine,’ 
and one part in the Latin version is named fen^ from Arabic fann. 

Page 246, 1. 11. goode men. The metre requires that these two words 
should be read as a compound of two syllables. 



GLOSSARY 


The Glossary is arranged on a strictly alphabetical basis, except as follows : 
initially, ]> (&) occurs after and just before y, with which it belongs in its 
modem development; but medially^ (9) are placed after and with after 
/, since these positions are most natural to the modem reader. Each word is 
given in its normal form, rather than in the form in which it happens to occur 
the first lime, as usually done in the so-called glossarial index. But words 
tending to lose a final element (usually final <?), even in normal Middle English, 
are sometimes given in the shorter form. The great diversity of ME. spelling 
makes frequent cross-reference necessar}?*, and such references have been freely 
given. Only in case of Orm’s forms with extra doubling of consonants hais 
normalizing occasionally been practised; though in rare cases forms with 
medial^ for z have not been given. Orm’s forms, owing to their importance, 
are designated by (O) after them. 

The etymology is given so far as the immediate form and language from 
which the word is derived. To attempt more would have been to increase 
unwisely the size of the book. Yet when some considerable change in the form 
of the word has occurred a hint of this is given. Thus OE. nouns (mainly 
feminines) which have assumed inorganic e in the nominative-accusative, under 
the influence of the oblique cases, are indicated by adding the OE. gender, as 
yi, m.^ neut. So the stem-forms of OE., OF. verbs, when differing from the 
infinitive, are added to explain ME. forms. In case of all irregular verbs, 
weak, strong, and minor classes, the OE. present and preterit- singular are 
given. With strong verbs a number in parentheses indicates the class, according 
to the numbering of the Grammatical Introduction. An (R) denotes reduplica- 
tion verbs. 

Common abbreviations need no explanation, as substantive, verb, 
inf., infinitive, &c. The following may be explained : n.,g., d., a., nominative, 
genitive, dative, accusative ; ns., ds., etc., nom. sg., dative sg. ; wk., weak ; wkv., 
stv., ptp7‘v,, anv., weak, strong, preterit-present, anomalous verbs, as in the 
Grammatical Introduction. For other abbreviations, see list at the beginning 
of the book. All references to the text are to page and line. 

The manner of marking quantity has been explained in the Grammatical 
Introduction. In addition some few diacritics have been added in the Glossary 
to assist in differentiating certain sounds. Thus c^c/i is marked r; in 
judge (d5), /; g=jf initially in stressed syllables,^; ^ voider English 6; 
OF. short and long, u. Medial or final €, when certainly silent, is 

sometimes marked £. 


A. 

a, see an, adj\, an, prep, adv,, he. 
a, see an, ari, 

a, a, inter j., OF. a, Lat. ah ; ah 25, 
23 ; a, 140, 5. 


a, aa, adv.^ OE. a; &ver^ igiS, 13. 
Aaron, sh., Lat. Aaron; Aaron, 213, 

4- 

abashed, pp. as adj., abassen < OF, 
abalr, 3 sg. abalss-j abashed, 90, 
30 . 



320 


GLOSSARY 


abbeye, abbaye, OF. abbeie; 
abbey \ abbey, loS, i8; abbaye, 113, 
21. 

abbot, sb.^ OE. abbod, infl. by OF. 

abbat(?) ; abbots 1,1. 
abbotrice, sh,^ OE. abbodrice; office 
of abbot, I, 10. 

abei^e(2i), who., Kt.=*Ml. abi 55 ci^ 
(^abien) ; OE. alsycgan-bohte ; buy, 
fay for, atone for ; inf abegge, 217, 

30- 

Abel, sb., Lat. Abel; Abet, 68, 10. 
abel5e(n), stv., OE. abelgan-bealg 
(3) ; gro2o angry, make angry \ fp. 
abolse, 184, 20. 
abeod, see abide (n). 
abettour, jA, OF. abettour ; abettor', 
pL abetlours, 236, 16. 
abhomynable, adj.,OY. abominable ; 

abominable, 237, 15. 
abide(rL), abyde(ii), stv., OE.abidan 
-bad (i ) abide, wait for ; mf. abyde, 
108, 2; pr. 3 sg. abyde]), 216,^ 23; 
pt, sg. abgd, 64, 17; pt. pi. abiden, 
35, 5; abide, 205, 14;//. abiden, 
32, 4. Sth. 3 sg, abit, 180, 8; pt. 
sg. abeod, 187, 13. 

Abirdene, sb., Aberdeen, 160, 15. 
abogbt, see abye(ii). 
abol3e, see abel5e(n). 
abote, abdute(n), see abuten. 
above, see abuven. 

Abraham, sb., Lat Abraham ; Abra- 
ha 7 n, 33, 10. 

abreide (n) , stv., OE. abregdan-brsegcl 

(3) ; draw out, spring up, awake ; 
pt. sg. abraid, 23, 15. 

abrfkefn), stv., OE. gebrecan-brsec 

(4) ; break \ pt.pl. a&eken, 60, 3. 
abrgt (MS. a brod), adv., OE. on 

bradj widely, profusely, abroad, 
60, 20. 

absence, sb., OF. absence; absence, 

1 1 7, 10. 

absent, adj., OF. absent; absent, 117, 

5 - _ __ 

abuten (abuton), abouten, obout, 
abote, prep, adv., OE. abuton < 
onbuton ; about, i, 16 ; 3, 8 ; a- 
bouten, 53, 12 ; ^ont, 138, 31 ; 
abote, 132, 14; aboute, 222, 24* 


abuten, prep., OE. on-be-iitan ; 
without, 178, 28. 

abuven, buven, adv. prep,, OE. 
abufan < onbufan ; above, 14, 15; 
above, 92, 31 ; buven, 178, 30. 
abyde(n), abyden, see abide (n). 
abye(n), aby3e(n), wh, OE. abycgan 
-bohte; pay for, atone for, MnE. 
abidehy confusion with ME. abiden ; 
inf abye, 54, 19, abyje, 55, 6; pr. 
sbj. sg. aby, 55, 6 ; //. aboght, 238, 
21. 

ac, oc, conj., OE. ac, oc ; but, 2, 20 ; 
acc ( 0 ) 8, 25 ; oc, i, 8. Sth. ah, 
184, 24; auh, 197, 15. 
accidental, adj., OF. accidentel (al ?) ; 
accidenidl, 235, 22. 

accordandly, adv., Nth. pr. ppl. of 
accorden (OF. accorder) + ly ; ac- 
coT^ingly, i44j^23. 
account, see acounte. 
accuse (n), OF. acuser; accuse*, 
pp. accused, 106, 17; accusyd, 109, 
^ 3 - 

achtande, see aughtene. 
acorde(n), who., OF. accorder; 
accord, agree, reconcile*, pr. pi. 
acorden, 1 20, 5 ; pt. sg. acordede, 
2, 13; pp, acorded, 244, 7* Sth. 
pr. pi. acor^]?, 225, 20^ 
acounte, acount (account), sb., 
OF. cunte (conte), ini^y vb. acunter; 
accotmt, 90, 28; acount, 156, 21; 
account, 155, 30. 

acoupe(n), w^., OF. encuper < 
enculper ; accuse, inculpate ; pp. 
acouped, 92, 3. 

acumbri(n), who., OF. encombrer; 

encumber*, Sth.inf. acumbrl, 2 1 1,20. 
acupement, sb., OF. acoupement; 
^ accusation, 42, 26. 

Adad, sb., Lat. Atad ; Atad, 35, 4. 
Adam, sb., OE. Adam, Lat. Adamus ; 
Adam ; gs, Adames, 32, 25 ; Adam, 
67, 18. 

adle(n), who., cf. dialectal Lng. ad- 
dle; cf. ON. d Slash; gain*, pp. 
addledd (0), ii, i. 
admiral, admirail, sb., OF. amiral, 
admiral, admirail; amir, Saracen 
ruler, 37, 10; admirail, 46, 31. 



GLOSSARY 


321 


adonward, see adunward. 
adoun, adrad, see adun, adrede(2i). 
adra5e(n), adrawe(n), s^v., OE. 
adragan-drog (6) ; draw out \ imp. 
pi. adrawej), 207, 19; pp. adraje, 
4^,25. 

adrede(ii), Sth. adrfde(xL), stv , 
OM. dredan (WS. drffidan)-dred 
(R) ; dread^ fear ; pp. adrad, 90, 
29. Stii. inf. adrgden, 180, 2; pr. 
I sg. adrfde, 176, 0. 
adre3ic]ie(ii), wkv.^ OE. adrencan; 
drown, drench \ pi. sg. adrenched, 
73, 12; pt.pl. adrenchten, 197, 4. 
adrive(ii), stv., OE. adrifan-draf (i); 
drive, drive away, pp. adriven, 
197, 5- _ 

adun, adoxm, adv. prep., OE. ot 
dune ; down, 38,25; adoun, 82, ii. 
aduneward, adonward, adv,, OE. 
on dun, y*., + ME, ward; downward, 
201, 10; adonward, 20S, ii. 
advent, sb., OF. avent, advent; ad- 
ve 7 tt ; ecclesiastically, the period 
including the four Sundays before 
Christmas, 200, 2. 

adversarie, sb., OF. adversarie ; ad- 
ve 7 'sary, 239, 20. 

SIcTi, sefne, see foh, fven, 
refce, see f ver.. 

80ft, softer, see eft, after. 

80h, ssie, see ac, eie. 

eeijjer, »lo, (Sloh.), see eijjor, fch. 

fielder, sb,, Sth.*Ml. alder; WS. 

ealdor; chief , prince, 189, 23. 
fisldrihten, sb. as adj,, OE. eal + 
drihten; almighty, 184, 21. 
fieUe, selmes, see al, almes. 
fiem, fiom, eende, see be(n), fm, ende. 
seni, enl, indef. pr 7 t., OE. ^nig; 
afiy', senl, 178, 12; enT, 46, 26. 
Sth. ei, 47, 13 ; gs. eis in phr., eis 
weis, in any way, by any means, 
193, 27. Cf. ani. 
filorl, see ©rl. 
ler, seresst, see fr. 
fiercebiscop, see archebischop, 
lerd, Sre, serm, see frd, fre, arm. 
fiert, fisrwe, see b0(n), ar^. 
fiestende, sb., eME. for |st-; OE. 
eastende (ende) ; east end, 186, 7. 


8Bt, 83ton, see at, §to(n.) 
fietfpren, prep, adv., OE. setforan; 
before, 226, 24. 

Svest, adj., OE. Wisest; loyal, trusty, 
OTigm^hy piotts, 5, 8. 
ffivre, ievert, see fver. 

»vric, eivricli, see everilc. 
afande(n), wkv., OE. afandian; try, 
tempt', pp. afanded, 180, 27. 
affaytie(n), wkv., OF. affaitier; af 
fect\ fashion, prepare', adorn', tame, 
subdue', pp, affayted, 219, 27. 
afE©are(n) = off|re(n), wkv., OM. 
offeran, WS. off^ran ; frighten, 
frighten of', Sth., pr. sbj, sg. affeare, 
^93. 33* 

afifeceyon, sb., OF. affeccion; ajfec- 
tio 7 i ; pi. affeccyons, 145, 8. 
afforce(n), wkv., OF. aforcei ; force, 
t 7 y, attempt ; Nth, p 7 \ pi. afforces, 
144, 12. 

AfErioan, sb., Lat. Africanus, OF. 

♦African (?) ; Africanus, 191, 25. 
afFter, see after. 

afinde(n),j‘/z',, OE. gefindan (findan) 
-fand (fgnd) (3) ; find, obtain ; inj. 
afinden, 178, 2. 

af9re(n), afgrn, prep, adv., OE. on 
foran ; before, archaic and dial. 
afore, 109, 5 ; afgm, 117. 3- 
afraye(n), wkv., OF. effraier ; 
frighten, startle', pp. afrayed, 148, 
14. 

afslf(n), stv., Sth. *=M1. ofslgn (slfn) 
WS. slean-sloh (6) ; slay, strike 
down ; Sth. pp. afsla5e(n), 1 86, 20. 
after, aftir (aftyx), efter, prep, adv., 
OE. sefter ; after, afterward ; jefter, 
2, 9; afFterr (O), 8, 13 ; aftir, 49, 
17; aftyr, 90, 25 ; efter, 1,4; after, 
cifterward, 236, 6. 

afterward, aftyxwarde, adv., OE. 
sefterweard ; afterward, afterwards, 
68, 3 ; aftyrwarde, 145, 21. 
agsines, see agenes. 
aga(n), anv., eSth. = M1. ggn (aggn) ; 
OE. agan-eode; go) pp. agan, 
182, 25. 

agane, aganis, see agein, agayne9» 
Agatirses, sb., Xat. Agatirsis ; Aga* 
tirses, 221, 5. 



^22 


GLOSSARY 


agayne, see agein. 
agaynes, a5ayiis, aganis, igaines, 
adv. prep. ^ OM. on(an)gegn iiifl. by 
ON. igegn ; again, 144, 1 1 ; aganis, 
166, 12; igaines, 153, 6; agayns, 
241, 14; ojains (o^ayns), loi, 7. 
Stb. ayeins, 233, 4. 
a^e, a5ere, see §5031. 
agein, ageyn, agayne , a3ein(a5eyn), 
prep, adv., OM. on(an)gegn (WS. 
ongen, gean) infl. by ON, igegn; 
again, 50, 16; ageyn, 50, 25; 
agayne, 109, 15; ajeyn, 63, 21; 
ajain, 183, 21. Nth. ogayn, 139, 
13; ogayne, 136, 7; igain, 149, 
24; agane, 167, 28. Sth. a3an, 
184, 15. 

a5einward, adv., OE. ongegnward, 
WS. ongeanweard; backivards,i<)'^, 

33. 

agelte(n), wkv,, Kt. = MI. agilte(n) ; 
OE. agyltan ; be at fault ; pr. pL 
agelte]7, 216, 25. 
a5e(nj, age(n), see 950(11). 
age(ii), ag(agh), ptprv., eMB., 
Nth. « Ml. 9ge(n), owe(n); OE. 
agan-ahte; ham-, owe, ought \ eME. 
pr. I, 3 sg. ah, 176, 2 ; pr. sbj. sg. 
ase, 188, i; pt. sg. ahte, 5, 22; 
agte, 29, 2i ; auhte, 87, 28, Nth. 
pr. I, 3 sg. awe, 136, 3; pr. pi. 

. awe, 146, 20 ; pt, sg. aght, 134, 25 ; 

pt.pl. aghte, 147, 13. 
a3§(n), agen, ayen, adv., OE. on 
gen<gegn; back\ again, 88, 13; 
a^e, 36, 9; agen, 22, 7; ayen, 79, 
28. 

agdnes (agSnes), a5enes, adv. prep., 
OE. on gen <gegn; WS. on gean; 
against \ agenes, 2, ir ; agsenes, 2, 

31. Nth, ogayns, 141, 8. Sth. 
asfnes, 222, 19; onsfnes, 226, 18. 

a5®ve(n), a5eove(n), stv., OM. age- 
fan-gjef (WS. giefan-geaf) (5); give 
up, surrender', pt. pi, aiaven, 6, 

32. Sth. pr. I sg. ajeove, 196, 25. 
ageyn, a5eyn., see agein. 

a55, see ai. 

aghast, pp. as adj., OE. *ag^tan, cf. 
giestan ; terrified, aghast ; pi. aghaste, 
208, 2. 


a3henii, see 95en, adj. 
aght, aht, Nth. =M 1 . ehte, eijte, 
ONth. sehta; eight, 132, 10. 
aght, aghte, see aht, a5e(n). 
aginne(n), agynne(n), ^ stv., OE. 
aginnan-gan (3) ; begn ; pt, sg. 
agon, 182, II ; imp. sg. agyn, 212, 

13. 

SLgg(n),pp. as a^i., OE. agan ; agane, 
gone; agg, 65, i. 

aggn, adv., OE. *ongan <ongagn; 
again, 27, 19. 

agray]?i(n), -e(n), wkv., ME. a + ON. 
grei])a ; prepare ; Sth. pr, sbj. pi. 
agray>T, 219, 31. 

a3t, indef.prit., OE. awiht, awht, ant ; 

aught, anything, 39, 9. Cf. o5t. 
agt = aht, sb., OM. seht, W^S. eaht, 
y.; council, care, 21, 8 ; 22, 18. 
agte, ahte (ehte), aucte, sh., OE. 
aeht,y ; possessions, property, power, 
money, 22, 26 ; ahte, 189, 4 ; aucte, 
81, 6. Sth. ehte, 177, 31; ejte, 
226, 16; eihte, 202, 29. 
agte, ahte, see age(n). 
agtilt6(n), whv., Sth. = Ml. agilte(n) ; 
OE. agyltan; be in fault \ pp. 
agiilt, 176, II. 

agyn, agynne(n), s^e aginne(n). 

ah, ah (ahne), see ac, a3e(u). 
ahon, sPv., OE. ahon-heng (R); 

hang} inf. ahon, 187, 26. 
aht, see aght. 
ahte, see agte. 

ai, ay, a55, adv., ON. ei, cognate 
OE. a ; ever, 15, 17 ; a53 ( 0 ), 9, 3 ; 
ay, 87, 32. 

aiaven, see a5eve(n). 
aiper, see eijjer. 

afcenne(n), wko., OE. acennan; 

beget', pp. akennet, 196, 29. 
al, adj., OM. al, WS. eal ; all, 2, 10 ; 
pi. al (for alle?) 1,13; selle, 2, 26 ; 
alle, 2, 2S', gpl. allre (O), 13, 30. 
Sth. eal (eSth.), 177, 30; ^.alles, 
in phr. alles cfinnes, of every kind, 
194, 29; ds. alien, 187, 33; fas, 
alle, 181, 5 ; gpl. alre, 182, 31. 
al, all, adv., OAng. 2d, WS. eal; 
wholly, 3, 25; all if, although, 
160, 5. 



GLOSSARY 


323 


Alamanie, sL, OF. *Alanianie; 

Germany, Almaigne, 5, 31. 
Albamar, sb., OF. Albemar, Albe- 
marle, Fr. Aumale ; Alhe^narJe, 5, 

7* 

Albania, sb., Lat. Albania ; Albania, 
221, 23. 

aid, adj., eMe., Ntli. for Ml. gld; 
OAng. aid, WS. eald; old, i, 15; 
130, 2, eStb. eald, 176, 4; gpL 
aldrene, 191, 27. Cf. gld. 
alderbeaest, adv,, OM. alra (WS. 
ealra) + superL of OM. heh (WS. 
heah) ; highest of all, 104, 3. 
alderman, sb,, OM. alderman, WS. 
ealderman ; alderman, chief of a 
guild, 1 1 7, 7. 

Aldewingle, sb,, Aldwinkle (North- 
ampton), 4, 24. 

Aldithele, sb,, Aldithiey] James of, 
237, 7. 

aldrene, see aid. 

alfste(n),w>^z'., OE.al^stan; endure, 
last, 180, 26. 

Alexander, sb., OF. Alexandre ; 
Alexander, Bishop of Lincoln, 3, 

25. 

Alfrfd, sb,, OE. iElfrgd; Alfred, 
204, 28, 

alh-wet, conj., Stb. = Ml. alwhat; 

OE. eal + hwast ; until, 21S, 2. 
alien, sb., OF, alien, adj . ; alie9i, 
foi'eigner ',pl. aliens, 335, 28. 
Alisandre, Alisanndur, sb., OF. 
Alisandre ; Alexander ; Alisaundur, 
126, 3; Alisandre, 205, 4. 
alive, adv., OE. on live ,* alive, 
40, 7. 

allane, see al§n. 

alias, interj., OF. alas, halas ; alas, 
56, 10. 
alien, see al. 

alles, adv,, based on OE. call; 

wholly, altogether, ^97, 20. 
allmahliti^, adj., OM. almsehtig, WS. 

ealmihtig; almighty, (O), 13, 21. 
allgne, see al^n. 
allre, alls,- al, als. 
alxnast, adv,, Nth.. 1= MI. almgst ; 
: OAng. almast-mast ; almost, 134, 

26. 


Almayn, sb., OF. Allemaigne, Ale- 
maine; Almaigne, Germany, 106, 
20. 

almes, sb., OE. selmesse, f. ; alms, 
100, 1 1 ; eMB. selmes, 3, 29. Sth. 
elmesse, r77> 4* 

almesdede, almousdede, sb._, OE. 
selmesse + OM. ded, WS. dsed, ; 
alnisdeed, almsgiving, 91, iS ; 
pi. almonsdedes, 147, i. 
almfst, adv., OM. almost, WS. eal- 
mSst; almost, 207, 27, 
almichti, see almi^ti. 
almi5t, adj., OM. almseht, (almiht) ; 

almighty', almighte, 47, 15. 
almiijti, almihti, (almichti), adj., 
OM. almaehtig (almihtig) ; al- 
mighty, 67, 10; almihti, 193, 16; 
almichti, 211, 27. 
almousdede, see almesdede. 
alneway, alwey, sb., OE. ealne + 
weg; ahvays, 216, 10 ; alwey, 225, 

29* 

al^n (all§ne), adj., OM. al, WS. 
eal + an; alone, 102, 3; allane, 
244, 13. Nth. allane, 168, 8. 
al§nd, adv., OE. an (on) + land, 
Ignd; aland, on land, 222, 15. 
al6we(n), wk7),,0'^. alloiier; allow', 
pr. 1 sg. alowe, 107, 30. 

Alpinus, Alpynus, sb., Lat. Alpi- 
ntis; Alpinus, 221, ^2. 
alre^yrst, adj., OM, alra, WS. 

ealra + first of all, 2, 12. 

als, alse, conj., OM. al swa ; as, i, 
15 ; aise, 2, 20; als^, 52, 20; alls 
(O), 9, 19 ; yet, 25, 8; also, i 27, 3. 
also (so), alswf. Nth. alsa, alswa, 
adv., OM. al swa (*sa); WS. call 
swa; also, 15, i ; alswa (eME.), 
8, 9. Nth. alsa, 163, 15. Sth. 
alsw§, 215, 9. 

alswic, adj. adv., OM. al (WS. eal) 
+ swylc; such, wholly such, 2, 19 
alswg, see als 9. 

al]?8rbeste, adv., OM. alra, WS. 

ealra + beste; best of all, 87, 5. 
alj>ermast, aljjirmast^, adv., Nth. = 
Ml. aljjermgst ; OAng. alra, (WS. 
ealra) + mast; most of all, I34» 9 ? 
aljirmaste, 142, 27. 


Y 2 



324 GLOSSARY 


alve, sd.j OE. gelfen, /; fairy ^ df\ 
gpL alven, 190, 27. 
alwayis, adv., OAng, al(ne)weg + 
es ; always i 168, 6. 
alweldand, pr, ppL as adj,, OAng. 

alweldan; almighty, 140, 27. 
alwey, am, see alneway, be(n). 
amad, pp* as adf, OE. gemSdan; 

driven mad, insane, 90, 30. 
Amadase, sb., OF. Amadace ; Ama- 
dace, J27, 2. 
am^n, see amen. 

amang, imange, adv, prep., eME., 
Etlx = Ml, amgng; OE. on ge- 
mang ; among, g, 7 ; 129, 6. Eth. 
omang, 137, 10; imange, 154, 4. 
amanges, cdv., OE. on gemong; 

among, amongst, 226, 21. 

<4,men, amien, adv., Laluamen ; amen, 
so be it; am^ (O), 13, 24, 
amendement, sb., OF. amendement ; 

amendment, 59, 12. 
amende(n), StE. amendi0(n), wkv., 
OF. amenderj amende satisfy, 70, 

8 ; pp. amended, 206, 30. Sth. inf. 
amend!, 328, 22. 

amendyng, sb.pr. ppL, ME. amenden ,• 
amending, correction, loi, 6. 
amenges, adv., OE. on gem§ng infl. I 
^ bygem^ngan?; among, 212, 18. i 
Amer, Amery, sh., OF. Aylmer; 
Aymer; Sir Amende Valence, Earl 
of Pembroke, 168, 27 ; Amer^, 169,18. 
amf sure, adj., OF. a mesure ; fitting, 
suitable, 229, ir. 

amidde, amiddes, adv. prep , OE. 
on + midde ; amid, amidst, 206, 27 ; 
amiddes, loi, 5. 

am9ng, adv. prep., OE. on gemang 
(-mgng); among, 18, 10. 
amgnges, adv., OE, on gemgng ; 

among, amongst, 117, 17. 
amoTint0(n), wJsv., OF. amnnter 
(amont^ ; amount, rise to ; Eth. 
inf. amount, 156, 22. 
an(a), adj., eME., Etln — Ml. gn; 
OE. an ; one, alone, i, ii ; 129, 3 ; 
a, 144, 25 ; ds. ane, 87, 7. Sth. as. 
anne, 180, 17 ;fds, are< anre, 181, 
i; fas. ane, 19 1, 195 wkns. ane, 
al ne, 178, 30. 


an(a), indef. art., OE. an 'one in 
we^ form \ an, I'l, 1, "l ; a, 3, 26. 
an(a), ane, adv. prep., OE. an, on; 

on, in,i, 14; a, i, 19; une, 213, 13. 
ansin, anan, see angn. 
ancheisim, sb., AN. enclieisoun; 
cause, reason; pi. ancheisiins, 199, 

^ 7 * 

ancre, sb., OE. ancra; anchorite, 
nun, 198, 6; gs. without ending, 
202, 15; 203, I. SthL. pi. ancren, 
198, 25. 

and, ande, conj., OE. and, gnd ; and, 
I, 2; annd (O), 8, 14; ande, iiS, 
13; if, 14, I. eStln ant, 191, 16; 
end, i77> ^ 7 * 

Andreas, sb., OE. Andreas, Lat. 
Andreas, later displaced by OF. 
Andreu ; Andrew, i, 19. 

Andrew, sb., OF. Andreu ; Andrew, 
I* 

andswarie(n), wkv., Sth. = Ml. 
answere(n), (-sware(u) J : OE. and 
(9nd)-swarian (swerian) ; answer ; 
pf, sg. andswarede, 181, ii; pt. pi. 
answarede, 184, 30. 

Andwerp, sb., OF. Andwerp, Ant- 
I werp ; Antwerp, 162, 30. 

ane, anne, see an. 

aneoste, aueouste, aneuste, adv., 
OE. on + ofest, efest; quickly, in 
haste; aneouste, 185, 9; aneoste, 
188, 33. 

anerly, adv., based on OE. an, or ON, 
__ einar^r?; dloite, 168, 5. 

Angel, sb., OE. Angel, Qngel ; Angel, 
name of one of Arthur's followers, 
186, 26. 

angel(l), aun^el, sh., OF. angel; 
angel, 64, 20 ; pi. aungels, 104, 5 ; 
angel^s, 105, ii ; angles, 219, 3. 
Nth. gs. without ending, angell 
stevyn angeVs voice, or music, 143, 3. 
anger, sb., ON. angr; anger, grief, 
distress, 106, 8. 

Angle (aggie), sb., OE. Angle; 
Angle, English ; pi. Anglis, 222, 
23; Sth. dpi. anglen, 191, 15. 
An|ou (Anjou), Angseu, sh., OF. 
Anjou ; Anjou, 5, 31 ; Angseu, 7, 9 ; 
Anjow, 226, 2. 



GLOSSARY 


angwys, sd,j ITth. ssMl. anguische 
(angaisse) ; OF. anguisse j miguish^ 
144, 19. 

anli6(n), stv., OE. onhon-lieng (R) ; 

hafzg, crucify \ inf, anhon, 184, 26. 
ani, any, 9ni, indef^ pm,y OE. ^nig 
infl. by an ; any^ 3, 2. ITtlu any, 
147, 10. StE. gni, 226, 17 ; d$. 
gnTe, 226, 17; pL gme, 226, 18. 
Cf. seni, eni. 

Anjow, see An^ou. 

anker, sh.^ OE. ancor ; anchor^ 80, 28. 

annd, see and. 

Anne, sb., OF. Anne; Anne, 131, 8. 
annexe (n), wku., OF. annexer ; 

an 7 tex, add-, pp, annexed, 237, 26. 
anoint, adj,, OF. pp. enoint < 
enoindre; anointed, 05, 7. 
angn, adv,, OE, an, an; at once, 
quickly, anon, 36, ii ; angn riht, 
right at once, mimediately, 198, 14. 
eStE. an^n, 185, 8; anan, 187, 

32. 

an6]?er (eME. an6])er), andtEire, 
adj,,p 7 'n., OE. an + otJer, another', 
anojier, 4, 19; anothire, 143, 25. 
anre, see an. 

Anselme, sh., OF. Anselme; An-> 
selm, 200, 9. 

answare, answer, onswere, sh., OE. 
andswara ; answer, 36, 22 ; answer, 
236,21; onswere, 192,31. 
answere(n), wkv., OE. andswerian 
(swarian) ; answer-, pt.sg. answeryd, 
105, 19 ; answerd (ansuerd), 136, 7 ; 
pi. pi. answerden, 212, 8. StE. 
onswerXe(n); imp, pi. onswerieS, 
200, 6 ; pt. sg. onswerede, 193, 15. 
ant, see and. 

Antecrist, sh., Lat. anticEristus, 
modified by OE. crist ; Afztichrist, 
gs. witEont ending, Antecrist com, 
I 33 » 3 - 

anvie, see envie. 

apaas, sh., OE. on (an‘, a) + OF. pas ; 

in pace, on foot, apace, 245, 5. 
ap|cEe(n), wkv., OF. empecEer ; 
hinder, impeach ; pp. apfcEed, 233, 
28. 

apfre(n), wkv., OF. aper- < aparoir ; 
appear-, inf apfre, 235, 30. 


3®5 

apert, adj., OF. apert ; open, mani- 
fest, 102, 8. 

apeyre(n), wkv., OF. enpeirer; im- 
pair-, pp. apeyred, 224, 14. 
apeyryng, sb., based on apeyre(n) ; 

ifitpairing, 224, 16. 
apli^t, adv., OE. on pliEt ; 07 t my 
faith, 42, II. 

apokalypsis, sb., Lat. apocalypses; 
apocalypse, 12, 23. 

Apollo, sb., Lat. Apollo ; Apollo, 

193, 19- 

apon, see npon. 

apostel, apostil, apostlo, sb., OE. 
apostol ; OF. apostle ; apostle, 131, 
28 ; apostil, 135, i ; apostle, 213, 
20 ; pi. apostlis, 132, 29. 
appel, sb., OF. seppel ; apple, 67, 26. 

oStE. ds. epple, 198, 14. 
appr9cEe(n), wkv., OF. aprocEer; 
approach ; pr. ppl. apprgchyng, 
15 ; P- appigched, 234, 
4. 

aquelleCn), wkv., OE. acwellan-OM. 
cwalde (WS. cwealde) ; kill, quell-, 
imp. sg. aqiiel, 44, 23. ISTtE. pt. sg. 
aqualde, 188, 12. 

aqueyntaunce, sb., NF. aqueintance, 
OF, acointance; acquaintance, 95, 
19. 

Aquitaine, sb., OF. AqiiitaEie; 
Aquitaine, 226, 2. 

aquynt, adj., ITtE. = Ml. aqueint 
(aquaint); NF. pp. aqnemt, OF. 
acoint; acquainted, 170, 20. 
ar, are, adv., NtE. = Ml., Sth. gr; 
ON. ar, cogn. witE OE. ^r ; ere, 
128, 13; are, 138, i. 
ar, are, adv. prep. OE. ar, by sEoiten- 
ing; ere, before, 68, 23; 204, 7; 
are, 36, 26, Cf. gr. 
aras, see a]nse(n). 
ara^t, ara^te, see arfcEen. 
arblaste, sb., OF. arbaleste ; arbalisf, 
cross-bow, 215, 18. 

arcEebiscEop, sb., OE. arcebiscop; 
archbishop, 226, 24; eME. serce- 
biscop, 2, 9. 

arcEer, sb., OF. arcEier; archer, 
168, 3. 
are, see an. 



326 


GLOSSARY 


ire, are, see ar, ar, be(ii.). 

are, sb.', eME., Wth. = Ml. §re ; OE. 

ar, / ; fcevo7'^ grace, 1 1 , i . 
arecclie(iL), areccan-realite ; 

expound, explain, 182, 29. 
arfcheCn), wh).^ OE. aiScan-rahte 
(raEte) ; reach ; pt, araste, 47, 
12; pp, ara 5 t, 43, 17- 
aredde(n), wkv,, OE. aEreddan; 

deliver, save ; inf. aredde, 43, 
Aremouth, sd., earlier Eremou]) ; 
Yarniouth on the Isle of Wight, 
164, 8. 

are(n), see b§(n). 

aa:'eowe(ii), stv., eSth. *=M 1 . (a)Te- 
*we(ii); OE. *5iireowan-hreaw (2) ; 
commiserate, repent', pr. sbj. sg. 
areowe, 198, 32. 

arfr©(n), Kt. arere(n), ^kv., OE. 
Zrxran ; raise, rear; inf ar|re, 
205, pp. arfred, 200, 29; arfrd, 
205, 32. Et. inf arere, 218, 22. 
ajpest, sh., OF. arest; arrest, stoppage, 
168, 9. 

aj:fsiine(n), w-^.,*AN.araisuner; call 
to account; pt.sg. arfsunede,2i3, 16. 
arewe, arrow, j 3 .,OE.earli,_/:; arrow; 

arewe, 195, 33 ; arrow, 168, 19. 
ar5,’ adf, OE. earh, ph earge; 

cowardly; pi. serwe, 176, 19. 
Argail, sb.. Argyle (?), 222, 14* 
Argante, jAjOF.Argante?; Arganle, 
190, 27. 

arista ary^t, aryb-t, adv., OE. on(aii) 
+ riht; rightly, aright, arijt, 35, 
24; aryjt, 215, ^ ^ 

arise (n), stv,, OE. arlsan-ras (1) ; 
arise ; pr. 3 sg. arlst = arise]), 40, 1 5 ; 
imp. sg. aris, 40, 18; arise, 67, 13; 
pt. sg. (eME. aras, iSi, 8); args, 
39, 28; arggs, 211, 3; pt.pl. arisen, 
?> ; //• arise(n), 40, 30. 
Aristotill, ArystotiU, sb., OF. Ari- 
stotle ; Aristotle, 144, lo, 24, 
arm, sb., OE. arm, earm ; arm, 67, 8. 

©Sth. serm, 181, 8. 
arm, serm, adj., OE. earm ; poor. 

eSth. oerm, 188, 16; arm, 222, 6. 
arme(n), wku., OF. armerj arm; 
pt.sg. armyd, 112, 20; M armed, 
227, 16. 


armes, sb.pl., OF.armes; arms, 209, 
10. 

Armoryc, sb., OF. Armoriqne; Ar~ 
7norica, 220, 5. 

armure, sb., OF. armure ; ar7?ior, 

233, 16. 

armyd, see arme(iij. 
armyng, sb., OF. aimer ; arming =: 
armor, 173, 6. 

arn, see be(ii). 

args, arggs, see arise(iL). 
arrow, see arewe. 

arrysfr, sh., based on OE. arisan.; 

ariser, revolter, 234, 12. 
art, sh., OF. a^; art, 38, 9. 

Ar 5 ur, Artbour, sb., OF. Arthour; 
Arthur, Jfi, 8; ds. Arthure, 181, 
2; Artbour, 126, 9. 

Arviragus, sb., Eat. Arviragns ; 
Arviragus, mythical king of 
Britain, 220, 18. 
ary^t, arybt, see ari^t, 
as, see asse. 

as, ase, adv., OM. al swa, WS. eal 
swa; as, so, also, 29, 4; ase, 186, 
12. 

asayle(n), see assayle(ii). 

ase, asent, see as, assent. 

asise, assys, sb., OF. assise; assize, 
152, 18 ; assys, 147, 20. 
aske(n), Stb, as 3 rie(n), wkv., OE. 
acsian by late metathesis of cs (ks) ; 
ask; inf aske, 89, 30; pr. i sg. 
aske, 89, 31; pr. sbj. pi. asken, 
198, 30; pt. sg. askede, 198, 17. 
Etb. pp. askit, 171, 4. Stb. 
sbj. aski, 200, 1 8. 

askunge, sb., OE. acsnngj^; by late 
metathesis ; asking, request, 200, 6. 
aslawe, see asl|(n). 
aslf(n), siv., Stb. ~ Ml. aslg(ii), 
aslf(n) ; WS. aslean-sl6h(g), (6) ; 
kill, slay; pp. aslawe, 207, 28. 
aslepe, adv,, OE. on slepe; asleep, 
40, 22. 

aslepe(ii), st. who,, OM. *a5lepan 
-slep (WS. sl^pan), (K) ; possibly 
OAng. geslepa, %vkv , ; fall asleep, 
be ffuercome of sleep; pp. asleped, 
40, 8. 

asozle(n), see assoyle(n). 



GLOSSARY 


327 


asper, adj., OF. aspre ; harsh, cruel, 
103, 25. 

assayle(iL), whv,, OF. assailer; assail, 
aitack\ inf. assayle, 112, 21; pp^ 
asayled, 60, 13. 

asse, sb., OE. assa; ass, 31, 21 ; asse, 
89, 26 ; as, 52, 19. 

assemble (n), wkv., OF. assembler; 

assemble, come together, 163, 7. 
assent, assente, asent, sb., OF. 
assent, asent ; assent, 141, 4 ; 
assente, 147, 3 ; asent, 117, 26. 
assente(n), iv^., OF. assentir; 
assent \ pr. i sg. assente, 115, 7; 
pt. pi. assentyd, 105, 17. Wth. pt. 
sg. assentit, 171, 7. 
assoyle(n), asoile(n), whv., OF. 
assoldre ; pr. st. assoil- ; absolve ; 
imp. sg. assoyle, iii, 15; pr. sbj. 
assoyl, 165, 15 ; pt, sg. assoyled, 
III, 19 : asoilede, 205, 7. 
assys, see asise. 

asterday, sb., OE. easterdseg by 
shortening; easterday, 121, 32. 
astrengpe (n) , wkv.,OS.. *astreng' 5 ian, 
or based on ME. strengjie ; 
strengthen', pp. astrengjed, 21 1, 
II. 

astronomyen, sb., OF. astronomien ; 

astronomer, astrologer, 145, 17, 
astunte(n\ whv., Sth. = Ml. astinten; 
OE. astyntan ; cease ; inf. astiinten, 
201, 4, 

asnnie(n), who., OF. essonnier, 
essoigner; excuse; inf. asnnien, 
197, 20. 

aswinde(n), stv., OE. aswindan 
(swindan) -- swand (swpnd)', (3) ; 
vanish, pass away; pr. 3 sg. 
aswInde'S, 196, 17. 

at, prep, adv., OE. set ; to, at, fro7)i, 
according to ; set, 2, 24 ; at, 8, 9 ; 
att (O), 9, 2 ; at §n, at one, friendly, 
115, II ; att Godd {f>)/frovi God, 
10, 27 ; at hym, from him, 89, 19. 
Wth. at (used for to), 128,9. 
et, 192, 23. See also atte, 
at, see pat. 

ath, athe, sb., eWE. , Wth. == Ml. ; 
OE. atJ ; oath, 2, 29 ; athe, 145, 26 ; 
pi. athas, 6, 3. 


atSele, adj., OE. setJel; noble, generous; 
Sth. ds. a'Selen, 185, i; super!. 
atJelest, 183, 10. 

atsake(n), stv., OE. setsacan-soc (6); 
de7iy, disown ; eME. pr. i sg. 
atsake, 184, 24. 

atst9nde(n), stv., OE. setstandan 
(st§hdan)-st6d (6); stand, stand 
by; inf. atstpnden, 1S2, 10. 
atte = at . pe, pi-ep, + dem, pTn. , OE. 
set se, lOE. pe; at the, at, 17, 
26. 

atter, sb., OE. at or, attor; poison, 
pus, 180, 22. 

atvpre, adv., Sth. = Ml. atfpre; OE. 

setforan ; before, 205, 9. 
atwinne, adv., OE. on (an') + ON. 

twinnr; in two, asunder, 65, 15. 
at-wist, see atwite(n). 
at-wite(n), stv., OE. setwltan-wat 
(i) ; blame, twit; pr. 3 sg. atwlst = 
atwitep, 40, 16 ; p?\ pi. atwite, 37, 
12 ; imp. pi. etwlte? 5 , 200, 21. 
at’wo, Sth. at"wo, adv., OE. an + twa; 
in two, in twain, 39, 6. Sth, 
atwg, 239, 15. 

atywen, whv.,0'yi. setewan (-Iwan?), 
WS. setTewan 5 show, 

appear', pt. sg. atywede, 5, i. 
Anbemarle, sb., OF. Albemarle, 
Aubemarle ; Albemarle, 227, 5. 
ancte, see agte. 

aughtene anghtende, achtande, 
Nth. =s Ml. ehtepe ; OAng. 
sehtoffe; eighth, 147, 18; achtande, 
152. 7 * 

auh, auhte, see ae, age(n). 
aumen^re, sb., OF. almonier, au- 
monier ; almoner, dispenser of alms, 
88, 21. 

anngel, see 8.ngel. 
annter, anntour, see aventure. 
Austin, Anstyn, sb., OE. Austinus, 
Eat . Augustinus ; A ugustine, A ustm ; 
Awwstin (O), 8, 17; Austyn, 124, 
lo. 

anter (awter), sb., OF. auter, alter ; 
altar, 76, 24; awter, 122, 20; ds. 
autere, 231, 24. 

availe(n), avail(en), OF. vaile 
valoir ; avail, profit ; pt. sg^ 



GLOSSARY 


328 


availede, 60, 15. Wtli. inf. avail, 
129, 8 ; avale, 167, 25. 
avalle(n), wkv.^ Sth. = Ml. afallen ; 
OM. a fellan (WS. a fiellan) by 
confusion with fallan (WS. feallan)? 
fell, cut down, destroy, 187, 25. 

sb,, AiNT. Avalun i Avalun, 
Avalon, 190, 26. 

avaxice, sb., OF. avarice; ccvarice, 
346, 12. ^ 

avaxonSs adj., OF. averous ; avari- 
cious, 88, 24. 

avaunce(n), wJiv,, OF. avancer; ad- 
vance ; inf avaunce, //. avaunsed, 
106, 6. 

avaunta^e, sh., OF. avantage; ad- 
vantage, 225, 4. 

ave, sh, Lat. ave ; ave, hail, 122, 28. 
avenge, see avo(n). 
aventiire (aunter), Wth. aventur 
(-our, -er), sb., OF. aventure; 
adventure', ITth. aventur, 168, 16 ; 
auntdur, 154, 9; //. aunlers, 126, 
12 ; an aunter, \it «>] « venture, 
209, 4. 

aventure(iL), wkv., OF. aventurer; 

cuiventure ; inf aventure, 106, 1 1. 
aver, see ever, 

av6(rL), stv., Sth. Ml. aion; OE. 
afon-ieng (R); receive, take; ft, 
pL av&ge, 209, II. 
avorn, adv.prep., eSth. t=Ml, af§ren 
(forn) ; OE. on foran ; before ; avoin 
on, opposite, 1S6, ii. 
avow, sb., OF. ’•■avou, cf. avouer, vb , ; 

avow, vow, 239, 33. Cf. vow. 
Avyoen, sb., OF. Avycen ; Avicen, 
Avicenna, 245, 28. 
avys, avyse, sb., OF. avis; advice, 
232, 25 ; avyse, 105, 20. 
avyse (n), wkv., OF. aviser; advise ; 

pp. avysed, 239, 28. 
awai, Bcwscy, awey, awaye, adv., 
OE. on weg; away, 29, 18; awey, 
98, 31 ; oway, 102, 12 ; awaye, 
143, 25. ISrth. oway, 136, 5. 
awake (n), stv., OE. *awacan-woc 
(d) ; awake ; pt, pi. awgke, 41, 23* 
awakene(n), whv., OE. awacnian; 
awcLken,arise\ awalcenin, 

193* 12* 


a'W‘aki6(n), wko., Sth, *= Ml. a- 
wakeCn); OE. awadan; awake', 
pf.pl. awakede, 211, 4. 
awe, awoi(y), see age(ji), awai. 
awelde(n), wkv., OM. geweldan 
(weldan), WS. wieldan ; 9 'uh, con- 
strain ; inf. awelden, 195, 14. 
awendeCn), wJcv., OE. awendan 
(wendan) ; turn away ; pp. awent, 

231, 12. 

awin, adj. <pp. mh. = Ml. §wen; 

OE. agen; own, 137, 4* 
awinne(n), stv., OE. gewinnan-wann 
(wgnn) (3) ; win, 46, 4. 
awite(n), piprv., OE. gevvitan-wiste ; 

know', pt.sg. awyste, 176, 17. 
awoke, see awake(n). 
awgld, sb., OM. gewald (gewald), 
WS. geweald; power, 21, 18. 
awondrie(n), wkv., Sth. = Ml. 
awundre(n) ; OE. awundrian; 
amaze, surprise ; pt. sg. awondrede, 
211, 9. 

awrfke(n), awr8eke(n), dv., OE. 
awrecan-wrsec (5) ; didve away, 
avenge ; inf awrfke, 42, 2 ; (eME. 
awreken, 183, 6) ; pr. 3 sg. awrgk]), 
217, 15 ; imp.pl. awrfke)), 43, 20 ; 
pp. awrfke, 67, 30 ; (eME. awneke, 
184, 29). 

awter, Awwstin, see auter, Austin, 
awyste, see awite(n). 

ax, sb., OE. eax, f. ; ax ; pi. axis, 
169,27. 

axe(n), eME. asen, Sth. axie(n), 
wkv., OE. acsian (ascian ) ; ask \ 
eME. inf. axen, 5, 19 ; pt. sg. 
axede, 181, 10; pt. pi. axede, 30, 
19. 

axtre, sb., OE. eax + treo, perk. 
^eaxtreo; axeltree, 124, 29. 

ay, ayeins, see ai, agaynes. 
ayeinsaie(n), wkv., OE. ongegn + 

ME. saie(n), seie(n); gainsay, 
deny, pp. ayeinsaide, 334, 8. 
ayeinstande(n), stgnde(n), stv., 
OE. onge^ + standan-stod (6); 
stand against, 7 vitkstand; inf. 
ayeiustande, 234, lo; ayeinstgnde, 
236, 26. 
ayen, see ajen. 



GLOSSARY 


329 


ayere, sd,j OF. air; azr, i4-3> 27. 
ay wli§re, adv,^ ON. ei + hvar, cogix 
with OE, ahwer, awer, everywhere^ 
88, 26. 


B. 

ba, adj., eME., Nt]i.=:Ml- bg ; OE. 
ba,_^ ofbegen; bothjS, 16. 

baar, see bar, adj. 

bac, sb,, OE. boec; bach, 52, iS. 

bacin, OF. bacin; basm, 39, 21. 

bad, badde, bead, see bidde(n). 

bsBron. see bfreQa). 

bal, sb.^ OE. *bal ; ball^ ball playing^ 

124, 31- 

balaunee, sb^ OF. balance; balance^ 
91, 21. 

bald, adj,^ eME,, Nth. « Ml. b§ld; 
OAng. bald, bald ; bold, 126, 7. 
eStb,^x. baldere, 184, 30. 

baidely, adv.^ OAng. baldlTce ; boldly, 
164, 28. 

baldie(n), wkv., eME,, KTtb.. = Ml. 
bglde(n); OM. baldian, baldian, 
WS. bealdian ; emboldett, bear one- 
self bi'avely \ Sth. balde, 192, 
30- 

bale, sh.j OE. bealu ; bale, harm, 
calamity, iS, 30. 

baleful, adj., eME. = Ml. baleful ; 
OE, bealiifiil ; baleful ; wk. 195, 
II. 

ball bale, eME. = hll. bale ; sb. 
<adj., OE. *bealo, adj.; baleful, 
evil one, 195, 32. 

ban, band see bfn, binde(n). 

baner, sb., OF. banere ; banner, 159, 
13- 

baneur, sb., OF. baneur ; siandara- 
hearer, 207, 27. 

Banoeburn, Bannok bum, sb., 
Bannockburn, 160, 14 ; ]je Bannok 
burn, 160, 16, 

baptxs(e), xvkv,, Ntb. = Ml. bap- 
tise(n) ; OF. baptiser ; baptize ; ft. 
sg. baptist, 1 31, 22. 

baptist, sk, OF. baptiste; baptist; 
J)e Baptist Jpban, 131^ 21, 


baptisyng, /r. ppl. as sk, baptizing; 
Jgnes baptlsyng, John^s baptizing, 

131, 25. 

bar(e), bare see bfre(n.). 

bar. sb., eME., Ntb. * Ml. bgr ; OE. 

bar; boar, 195, 12. 
bar, bajre, adj., OE. bser; bare, 17, 
14; baar, 221, 18. 

bare, sk, OF. barre ; bar; pi. bares, 
124, 31. 

bare, sk, ON. bSra = OE. b^ra ; 

tidal wave, bore, p. 250. 
baret, sb., OF. barat ; debate, trouble, 
148, 10. 

bixfot, adj., OE. bserfot; barefoot; 
$ 1 - 236. 9- 

bargane, sb., INth. = Ml. bargaine ; 
OF. bargaine ; bargain, 1 73, 9. 

barm, barme, sb., OE. bearm; bosom, 
lap; banne, 89, 3. 

barn, sb., OE. beam ; child, 146, 32. 
barnage, sb., OF. baronage, bamage ; 

baronage, 42, i. 

Barnard, sb., OF. Barnard ; Bamaid 
of Toulouse, 114, 28. 
bambf d, -bed, sb., ONtb. *banihged ; 
childhood, 131, 20. 

baron (oun), sb., OF. baron, AN. 

barun; baron ; pi. barons, 42, 6. 
baselard, sb., OF. baselarde; dagger, 
120, 28. 

basenet, sb., OF. basinet; kehnet, 
basinet, 112, 23. 

Bassianus, sb., Lat. Bassianus ; Bas~ 
sianits, 221, 21. 

bastard, sh., OF. bastard ; bastard, 
203, 22. 

bataile (batayle), batail (batayl), 
sb., OF, bataille; battle; batail, 
loi, 22 ; batayle, no, 14; bataile, 
157, 10 ; batayl, iCo, 14. 
bate(n), for abate(ii), wkv., OF. 
abatre ; abate, bate ; cast down, 
abolish ; inf. bate, 59, 3. 
batbe (bath), adj.prn., eME., Nth. 
for Ml. bgjje; ON. ba])ir; both, 
also, 3, 3 ; bath, 129, 5. Sth. dpi. 
ba?5en, 191, 18. 

baf>e(n), Sth. ba1Sie(n), wkv., OE, 
banian; bathe; pp. ba])ed, 63, 5, 
Sth. inf, batJIen, 195, 18. 



330 


GLOSSARY 


baude, sb,, NF. *baiidej i^awd; pL 
bandes, 237, 23. 
baudrike, see bawdrifce. 

Bauston, MS.Hauston, sb.,Bausion^ 
62, 6 [see note]. 

Bavere, sb., Bavaria^ 162, 9. 
bawdryke, sb.^ OF. baldret, *baldrik ; 

baldrick^ belij 120, 28. 
bayn, bayne, adj., ON. beinn ; 

straight^ projnpt^ 138, 23. 
b§, be, see be(ii), bi. 
bf ast, see bfst. 

bfat,bfate(n), see bfdc(n), bffce(2i). 
beautee, beute, sb,^ OF, beaute; 

beauty, 244, ii ; beute, 130, 16, 
bebirie(2i), wliv., OE. bebyrgan 
(byrigaJi) ; bury\ pt,pL bebirleden, 
2, 2 ; bebyried, 5j 2 ; pp, bebyried, 
7, 36. 

Bee, sb., OF. Bee; Bee (Normandy), 
5, 17. 

bfc, sb., OF. bee (lengthened) ; beak, 
15, 13. 

becume(»), see biciiiae(n.). 
b0d(d), bedden, see bidde(iL). 
bed (bedde), sb., OE. bedd ; bed, 41, 
17; bedde, 38, 23; pU bedes, 

74, 3. 

Bfda, sb., Lat. Beda; Beda, Bede, 
221, 29. 

bedde (n), ze/kz^., OE. beddian ; put to 
bed\ inf. bedde, 77, 24. 
bfde, eME. bede, sb., OE. gebed; 
prayer, petition, MnE. bead ; bede, 
13, 29. 

bede, bfde, see bidde(n), 
bfdell, sb., OF. bedel; beadle, I47» 16. 
beden, bedin, see bidde(n). 
bfde(n), zvko., OE. bedan ; pray ; pr. 

3 sg. b|at=b|t, Ml. b|te>, 180, 4. 
bede(n-). stv., OE. beodan-bead (2) ; 
offer, bid, announce, proclaim, com-- 
mand\ early confused with bidde(n), 
pray, command', inf, bede, 140, 
13; pr. sbj. sg. bede, 201, 20; 
imp. sg, bed, 22, 9 ; pU sg, bfd, 21, 
II ; b|de, 69, 6 ; bedd, 1 28, 16 ; pt. 
pi. bedden, 28, 17, clearly from 
bidden in form; pp. bfdyn, 169, 17. 
eSth. beoden, 185, 21 ; pr. 3 sg. 
beodety, 202, 22. 


bedene, see bidene. 
bee, sb., OE. beo; bee, 143, 23. 
befalle(n), bifalleCn). 
beforen, see biffren. 
begset, begseton, see bi5ete(n). 
be3e(rL), wkv., OM. began, WS. bie- 
gan, bygan; bend', pt. sg. beide, 
26. . 

bege, sb., OM. beh(g) (WS. beah), 
m . ; ring, collar, bracelet, 24, 12. 
begete(n), see bi3ete(n). 
beggare, sb., based on begge(n) ; 
beggar, 

begiiine(n), (begoutb), see bigm- 

^®(^)* . . 
beginnynge, sh , OE. beginning, f, 

beginnmg, 218, 27. 
see bu5e(n). 

bebf te(n), see bili5te(n). 
beli6ve(ii), OE. bebofian ; be- 
hoove, profit', pr. %sg. behove]), 91, 
6; bebovetb, 119, 21; pt. sg, be- 
hoved, 4, 12. 'Nth., pr, ^sg, bihoves, 
82, 26. 

behynd, see bihinde, 
beide, see b§je(n). 
beien, ad/, pt., OE. begen ; both, also, 
7, 8; glp. beire, 38, 22; beine, 
182, 3. 

beionde, beire, see beyond, beien. 
belamp, see belinipe(2i). 
belamy, sh., OF. bel ami; fair friend, 
41, 27. 

belde(n), voku., OM. held an, bel dan, 
WS. bieldan; embolden, encourage', 
inf, beldenn, 12, 14. 
beleave, beliave, sb,, Kt. = Ml. be- 
Ifve ; OE. *beleafe, geleafe ; belief 
2 1 1, 6 ; beleavee, 213, i ; billave, 
213, II. 

beleve, see bileve(n). 

BeUal, sb., Lat, Belial; Belial, 194, 
22. 

beliave, see beleave. 
beliinpe(rL), stv,', OE. belimpan-lamp 
(Igmp) (3) ; happen', pt, sg. belamp, 
4, 28. 

belle, sh., OE. belle ; bell, 76, 25. 
belleman, sb., OE. bell + man : bell- 
vian, 118, 30. 

belle (n), stv., OM. bellan-ball (WS, 



GLOSSARY 


331 


beall) (3) ; roar, bellow, swell with 
rage ; pp. bollen, 50, 6. 
belyve, bilive, adv,, OE. be + life; 

quickly, 90, 7; bilive, 186, 28. 
bfm, sb,, OE. beam; beam; eME. 

b|om, 3, 16; pL bgmis, 142, 22. 
beme, sb., OM. beme (WS- bleme), 
; trumpet; pi, bemen, 187, 23. 
be(n), anv., OE. beon-wses ; be ; inf. 

ben, I, 8; beo, 36, 30; bee, 106, 

6 ; pr, I sg, am, 22, 11 ; 2 sg. art, 
18,22; 3 is, 8, 2; ys,i76,7; iss, 
9, 9 ; 3 sg- nis, 65, 1 1 ; (eME. 

pr, pL sinndenn, 9, 2 ; sinden, 16, 

4) ; pi - aren, 19, 12 ; are, iii, 
30 ; am, 15, 12 ; pr, pi. beon, 48, 
28; ben, 105, 3 ; pr, sbj. sg, be 9, 
21 ; pr, shj.pl. be, 32, 16 ; imp, sg. 
be 18, 22 ; imp.pl. beS, 28, 7 ; pt. 
sg. was, I, 3 ; wass, 9, 30; wes, i, 
19; neg.pt. sg. nas, 43, 31 ; pt. pi. 
(eME. w^ron, i, 6 ; weron, 4, 

5) ; weren, 16, 16; were we, 25, 
14; wer, 73, 23 (eME. waren, 3, 
i; ware, 77, 3); wgren, 21, 10; 
wgre, 77, 17 ; neg.pt.pl. neren, 39, 
14 ; nere, 36, 14 ; pt. sbj. sg. were, 
16, 2 (eME. ware, i, 15); wgre, 
22, 21; pp. byn, 114, 16; been, 
243, 16. irth. inf. be, 128, 9; pr. 
I sg. am; 174, i^f\pr. 2 sg. ert, 157, 
14; pr. 3 sg. es. 128, 27 ; esse, 151, 
25; is, 127, 7 ; isse, 156, 24; neg. 
pr. 3 sg. neys«ne ys, 128, 5 ; pr. 3 

bes, 128, 32; bese, 139, 7; pr. 
pi. er, 136, 2 ; ere, 144, 2 ; ar, 173, 
32 ; pr. sbj.pl. be, 127, 26 ; pt. sg. 
was, 226, g; pt. pi. ware, 130, 24 ; 
war, 138, 28 ; was, 158, 31 (late 
Nth. weir = wer, 170, 32) ; pt. sbj. 
sg. war, 134, 2; ware, 246, 12 ; pt. 
sbj.pl. ware, 133, 15 bene, ,136, 

18. Stb. inf. been, 198, 6 ; ben, 
176, 2 (eME. gerund beonne, 192, 
23) ; pr. I sg. (eSth. epm, 176, 4 ; 
tern, 1761 I) am, 194, i; pr. 2 sg. 
(eSth. sert, 182, 30) art, 201, 23; 
pr. 3 sg is (ys), 176, 7; pr. pi. 
(eSth. siinden, 184, 31) ; pr. 1 sg, 

beo, 176, 4; pr. 3 sg. biS, 178, 
21 ; pr. 3 sg. bitJ, shall be, 1S3, 


II ; pr. pi. (eStb. beo}), 176, 
19); be>, 203, 20; beth, 119, 11; 
bii]), 176, 23; bi^J, 178, 20; bye]?, 
215, 23, pr. sbj. (eSth. si, 179, 
29 ; beo, 177, 8) ; pr. sbj.pl. (eSth. 
beon, 177, 4) ; imp. sg. (eStb. beo 
177, 5) sg. wes == was, 176, 1; 
neg. pt. sg. nes, 194, 8; nas, 204, 
15 ; pi. w|re, 1 79, 1 1 ; w|r, 223, 
5; pt. sbj. sg. (eSth. wfore, 18 1, 
9); w|re, 243, iS; pt.sbj.pl. (eSth. 
wforen, 182, 9) ; wfre, 242, 24 ; 
neg. pt, sbj. sg. (eSth. neore, 1S7, 
4) ; pp. (eSth. ibeon, 176, 3) ; ibe, 
203, 14; ybe, 236, 20. Kt. inf. 
ble, 2ir, II ; pr.pL bie]?, 212, 25 ; 
bieye, 212, 8; ibye, 212, 20; 
pt. pi. waren, 212, 17. 

benam, see benAme(n). 

benehe, sb., OE. bene, ; bench, 

58, 6. 

bend, sb., OE. bend, bend ; fie, 
ribbon, bend (in heraldry'), 228, 

15- 

bende(n), wkO,, OE. bendan (ben- 
dan) ; bend, bind, fetter; Ntb. inf. 
bend, 140, 17. 

bende, sb., OE. bend, bend,/.; bond, 
fetter, 180, 14. 

bene, sb., OE. ben, f. ; prayer, en- 
trecUy; pi. benes, 218, 21. 

benefyee, sb., OF. benefice ; favor, 
gift, benefit, 124, 12. 

beneme, see ■benime(n). 

Benet, sb., NF. Beneit, OF. Benoit ; 
Renet, Benedict, 155, 24, 

Beniamin, sb., Lat. Beniamin ; Ben- 
jamin, 25, 25. 

benime(n), biniine(n), stv., OE. 
beniman-nom (4) ; take away ; 
inf. binime, 177, 20; pr. i sg. 
beneme, 211, 18 ; pt. sg. benam, 
5, 21 ; pt. pi. binomen, 182, 19;// 
biniime, 183, 26. 

benisun, sb., OF. beneisun; blessing, 
henison, 134, 22. 

beode(n), bfom, see bfm, bfde(n). 

beo(n), beore, see be(n), bfre. 

b@onne(n), stv., based on OE, ban- 
nan, (bgnnan), beon (R); summon, 
command; pt, pi. beonnen, 187, 23. 



332 GLOSSARY 


beorn, sb., eSth. — Ml. bem, bem ; 
OE. beonij beom ; man^ Jiero^ 
warrior^ i86, 28. Cf. bern.‘ 
beot, sb,, eM 3 B. — Ml. bet ; OE. beot; 

threat^ boosts promise^ 184, 17. 
beot, b§o]), see b§te(ii), be(ii). 
beovie(n), wh).., eSth. - Ml. bive(n); 
OE. bifian, beofian ; ire7nble ; pt.pL 
beoveden, 187, i. 

bep§e]ie(n), wkv.^ OM. bepecan 
(WS. -pacan)-pehte j deceive ; pp. 
bepabt, i, 4. 

ber, sb,y Utb. = Ml. here ; OM. here, 
WS. bare ; 7/eise, uproar^ 150, 2. 

bfrd, sb., OE. beard, beard ; beard, 
86, 17; bgrde, 120, 29. 

berdene, sb., Kt. = Ml. birpene, bir- 
dene ; OE byr&en,J ^ ; burden^ 212, 
21. 

bfre, sb., OE. bera; bear {the a7tij7iar), 
82, 17. eSth. beore, 196, 3. 

bSre, sb.^ OE. b»r,y. ; bier^ litter^ 

35 , 3 * 

'beTe,sb., OM.geberu, WS. gebSiti,^:; 
bearing^ deportment^ noise, uproar, 

36, 20. 

bfrebag, sb., based on OE. beran + 
ON. baggi; bag^bearer (nickname 
of Scots), 1 61, 6. 

bfre-blisse, sb,, OE. beran + blisse ; 

bear-bliss ; as name, 216, 30. 
b§re(n), stv., OE. beran-bser (4); 
bear; inf. bfren, 22, 20 (eME. 
boeron, 3, 15); imp. pi. bfre,S, 
27, 19; pr. pi. bfrynge, 124, 2; 
pt. sg. bar, 4, 6; pt. pi. beren, 
70, 17; here, 35, 19; pt. sbj. sg. 
here, 53, 15 ; bare, 2, 5 ;//, bgren, 
33, 14; bgre, 66, n ; bom, 49, 28. 
Nth./r. 3 sg. bgres, 127, 19 ; b|rs, 
150, 20; pt. sg. bare, 131, 10; pt. 
pi. bare, 165, 24 ; pp. born, 132, 6. 
Sth. pr. 3 sg. berS, 198, 24; pr.pl. 
(eSth.) bereb, 177, 22; imp. pi. 
bfre^J, 199, 22 ; pt. jr^.bar, 181, 17 ; 
pt. pi. b|re(n), 205, 9 ; pp. (eSth. 
iboren, 179, 16); ibgre, 46, 7; 
ybgre, 209, 32 ; ybpren, 240, 8. 
berge(iL) — ber^en, berwe(ii), stv., 
OM. bergan-barg (WS. beorgan- 
bearg) (3); protect, save; inf. ber- 


gen, 14, 7; berwen, 86, 13; pp. 
borrjbenn, 10, 19. 
berid, berie(n), see birie(n). 
berie, sb., OE. berige, berie, f; 
berry, 21, 26. 

bering, sb., based on OM. ber, WS. 

bser; bearing, behcsviour, 25, 18. 
bem, sb., OE. beom, beorn; heiv, 
126, 7; 149, 25. 

bfm, sb,, OE. beam; child, Scotch 
beam, 82, 15. 
bernd, see beme(ii), wkv. 
beme(ii), stv., OE. beoman-b^rn (3) ; 

bum; pt. sbj. sg. biime, 1S2, 23. 
berne(n), wkv., OM. *beman, WS. 
bseman ; bum; inf. beme, 43, 2 ; pp. 
bemd, 58, 27. Sth. pr. pi. bemej?, 
218, 7; pr. ppl. bemynde, 217, 24. 
berrhless, j 3 ., OE. *beorhels,berhels; 

salvation, 10, 13. 
bfrst, see bfre(ii). 
berwe(n), see berge(rL). 

Berwik, sb., Berwick, 159, 8. 
bf ryng, sb., OE. *bernng,/. ; hearing; 
nativity, 231, 20. 

besset, bosmtte, see besitte(n), be- 
sette(n). 
bes(e), see be(ii). 

besetten, wl^., OE. besettan ; sur- 
round, beset ; eME. pt. sg. besrette 
= besette, 5, 22 ; pp. bisett, 12, 25. 
besi3te, sb., OE. *besih‘(S, *besiht, f. ; 
provision, 226, 8. 

besitte(n), stv,, OE. besittan-sset (5) ; 
sit upon, oppress, besiege ; eME.//. 
sg. besset, 2, 13. 

besme, sb., OE. besma ; besom, bundle 
of rods, 194, 16. 
best, see god. 

bfst, sb., OF. beste; beast, 82, 18; 
//.bfstes, 51, 21. eSth. bgast, 195, 
12. 

beswike(n), see biswike(ii). 
beswg, adv., Sth. « Ml. bes-wd; OE. 

be + swa; by so, so that, 214, 2. 
besynes, see bisines. 
bet, adv. {adjl) comp. , OE. bet ; 

better, 31, 14; quickly, 239, 5. 
betfclie(n), beteht, see bitfehe(n). 
bete(n), who., OE. betan ; mend, 
remedy, better; inf. bete, 129, 23; 



GLOSSARY 


333. 


3 bete25, i 6 , 22. eSth. pr, 
3 sg, beot=bet=bete2y, 180,4; //• 
ibet, 179, II. 

bfte(n), siv., OE. beatan-beot (2) ; 
inf^ b|te, 152, 6; pp. bftin, 
53? 30* eStli. ifnp* pL bfaten, 
194, 22 ; pp. ibeaten, 194, 15. 
betere, bettre, bettur, botste, see 
god. 

hep, see be(n). 

bej), sb,^ Sth. = M1. hap; OE. hasp; 
bath, 218, 6. 

b^e(ii), wkv,, OE. be?5ian ; wash, 
foment; inf bf^en, 33, 31. 
betoknep, betwe, see bitokne(ii), 
bitwen. 

betwix, bitwix, bitwixen, adv. 
prep.^i OM. betwex (betwix), "WS. 
betweox(betwiix) ; betwixt, between; 
betwyx, 2, 16; betwax, % 15; 
betwyxen, 117, 9; bitwix, 130, 3; 
bitwixen, 244, 4. iNTth, b^wixand, 
128, 15. 

beute, see beautee. 
bevlye(rL), Stli.=tMl. befle(n) ; 
WS. befieon-fleah (2) ; iijfl. by 
fl%en (flien) ; Jiee from, avoid ; 
inf bevly, 218, 25 ; pr. 3 sg. 
bevlys]?, 317, 23 ; bevl5?5t, 219, 17. 
Bewis, sb., Bewis (Bevis? see note), 
63, 6. 

bewreyynge, bewreyyng, sb., OE. 
♦bewreging, f ; bewraying, accus- 

90? 32- 

beye(n)5 beyne, see bige(n), be(n). 
bi (by), be, prep, adv., OE. bl ; by, 
bl, 3, 6; be, 3, 3. Kt. bie, 213, 

30* 

bibu5e(ii), stv., OE. bebugan-beah 
(2) ; avoids surround, reach, at- 
tain; pt. sg. bibab, 188, 21. 
bicalle(n), whv., ME. bi + ON. kalla 
(OE. ceailian) ; caB out upon, accuse ; 
pr. 3 sg. bicallety, 29, 26. 
bicam, see bicume(xi), 
bicause, see bycause. 
biclupie(n), wkv., St3i.=aMl. bi- 
clipe(n) ; OE. beclypian ; summon, 
accuse, 179, 18. 

bicume(n), stv., OE. beciiman~cdm 
(4) ; become ; inf. bicomen, 340, 2 ; 


pr. 3 sg* bicnme??, 16, 14 ; pf. sg, 
bicam, 34, 20; becom, 126, 18; 
bicom, 237, 19 ; pp. bicume, 46, 6. 
bidde(n), bydde(ii), bid©(3i), bid, 
stv., OE. biddan-bsed (5) ; pray, 
pray for, beg, command, offer, in- 
vite, by confusion with bede(n) ; 
inf. bidden, 16, 27; biddenn (O), 
9, 39 ; biden, 71, 31 ; bide, 71, 28 ; 
bid, 72, 28 ; pr, i sg. bidde, 10, 4 ; 
pr. I sg. biddest, 64, 34 ; pr. 3 sg. 
bidde]?, 40, 14; bit, 27, 14; pr.sbj. 
pL bidden, 196, 20 ; imp.'sg. bid, 18, 
12 ; imp. pi. bidde]?, 230, 30 ; pt. sg. 
badd(O), 8, iS; bad, 21, 3; badde, 
64, 10 ; pt. sg. offer, bid, 44, 33 ; bid 
godday, bid good day, 47, 7 ; pt.pl. 
beden, 35, 21 ; bedin, 60, 19 ; bfde, 
39, 1 1 ; pp. beden, 26, 20 ; bgde, 40, 
5, Ntb. inf. byd, 140, ii. Stli. 
pr. 3 sg. bit, 180, 4 ; pt. sg. (eSth. 
bjed, 185, 18) ; bed, 196, 4. 
bidfle(n), wkv., OE. bed^ian; de^ 
prive of; pp. bidflde, 185, 6. 
bide(n), bfde(n), stv., OE. bidan 
-bad (i) ; abide, await, expect ; inf. 
bydin, 118, 15 sg. bgd, 47? 4? 
bpde, 89, 25. 

bidene, biden, adv.,OTigin uncertain ; 
by that, thereby, together, also, at 
once ; bidene, 74, 2 ; biden, 148, 7 ; 
bedene, 116, 5. 
biding, see byddynge. 
bidlich, adj., based 011 OE. biddan, 
* to pray ’ ; that may be implored, 
gracious, 103, 15. 
bie, see bi, 

bie(n), bie]?, see be(n). 
bifaUe(n), stv,, OM. befallan (WS. 
befeallan)-feol (R) ; befall; inf. 
bifalle, 38, 20 ; pr. sbj. sg. bifalle, 
232, 5 ; pt* sg* bifelle, 75, i ; befelle, 
106, 8 ; byfyl, 8^9, i ; byfell, 135, 5. 
Sth. pt. sg. byful, 320, 6 . 
bifleo(n), stv., eME. = Ml. bifle(n); 
OE. befleon -iieaJi (2) ; flee, escape ; 
inf. bifleon, 180, 30, 
bifpren, biforn, bifpr, prep, adv., 
OE. before^ ; before ; eME. beforen, 
4, 30 ; bifgren, 16, 9 ; bifom, 16, 
3 ; bifpr, 47, 26 ; bif99re, 245, 19. 



334 


GLOSSARY 


bifgresaide, fp, or adj., OE. beforen, 
adv, + ME. saide ; foresaid, 235, 
22. 

biforn, see bifpren. 
bigat, see bi5ete(n). 
bige(n) =bi5e(n), bie(n), wkv.j OE. 
bycgan-bohte ; buy, atone for ; inf. 
bigen, 25, 6 ; bye, 95, 21 ; pt. sg. 
bou5te, 58, 26; boght, no, 3; pt. 
pi. bohton, 4, 29; pp. boght, 89, 
27. Wth. inf. bii, 131, 6 ; bye, 156, 
27. Cf. Stb. (bi^gen). Kt. inf. 
beye(n), 244, 17. 

bi^eonde, adv.prep,, OE. begeondan ; 

beyond, 185, 24. 
biget, see bi3ete(ii). 
bi3et©(ii), bigete(ii), begfte(n), 
stv., OE. begetan-gset (5) ; receive, 
obtain ; inf. biseten, 185, 21 ; begse- 
ton, 7, 2j begeten, 25, 20-, pt. sg. 
beg£et, 4, 18 ; bigat, 28, 23 ; bigfte, 
49, 16. 

bi^etyng, sb.^pr. ppL, OM. begetan, 
WS. begietan; begetting, genera^ 
iion, 10 1, 18. 

bi^^8(n), wkv., Sth. - Ml. biggen, 
ble(n) ; OE. bycgan-bohte ; buy, 
purchase, atone for', inf. biggen, 
74, 17 (SEMi.), bigge, 178, 9; /n 
3 sg. bi3&, 180, 24. 

bigge(n), zohv., ON. byggjaj build; 

pt. sg. bigged, loi, 13. 
bigines, see biginne(n). 
biging, sb., ON. bj'gging ; habitation, 
dwelling, 161, 6. 

bigimie(n), stv.. OE* beginnan-gann 
(3); begin; inf. biginne, 66, 20; 
pt. sg. bigon, 18 1, 20; pt. pi. 
begunne, 116, 18; pi. shj. sg. be- 
gonne, 216, 4; pp. begunnon, 8, 1 1 ; 
bigunnenn (O), 9, 30. Nth. pr. 3 
sg. bigines, 148, 17; pt. sg. begouth, 

166, 7. 

biginninge, bigi2a(n)ing, sb., OE. 
♦beglnnung ,/. ; beginning, 134, 27 ; 
byginnyng, 236, 4. 

bi5it©(n), stv., Sth. « Ml. bi5ete(n) ; 
WS. begietan-geat (5) ; receive, 
obtain, beget ; pr. 3 sg. bijit = 
bigite>, 198, 31 ; pt. sg. biget, 193, 
23 ; pp. bijite, 179, 16. 


Bigod, sh.. Bigod; Roger, Earl of 
Norfolk, 227, 3. 

bigg(n), aiw., OE. began-beeode ; go 
around, occupy, possess; cherish, 
honor; pp. biggn, 62, 19. eSth. 
pt.pl. byseode, 222, ii. 
bigon, see biginne(n). 
bigripe(n), stv,, OE. begripan-grap 
(r) ; gnpe, chasten, chide ; mf. 
bigripe(n), 19, 18. 
bi 3 f», see big^e(n). 
bigunnen, see biginne(n). 
bihald, stv.. Nth. = Ml. Sth. be- 
hglde(n) ; ON. behaldan (haldan) 
-heold (R) ; behold; p 7 \ pi. by- 
haldes, 145, 17; pt. sg. bihelde, 

bihate(n), stv., eME., Nth. = Ml. 
bihgte(n) ; OE. behatan-het (R) ; 
pro?nise ; pr. 3 sg. bibate??, 177, 14. 
bihede(n), wkv., OE. behedan ; 
watch, observe, guard ; pt. sg. 
bihedde, 187, 22. 

bihffdle(n) (i.evde( 7 i)),whv., Sth. = 
Ml. beh§vde(n) ; OE. beheafdian ; 
behead; pp. bihgfdet, 196, 26. 
bihelde, biheold, see bihalde(n), 
bih9lde(n). 

biheste, sb,, OE, behses,/ ; behest, piv- 
mise, 209, 12; pi. byhestes, 221, i6. 
bihete(n), stv., based on pt. bet’; 
promise; inf bibete, 52, 4. Cf. 
bih9te(n). 

bihi^t, see bih9te(n). 
bihinde, adv. prep., OE. bebindan 
-hindan; behind, 178, 31. 
bihof, sb., OE, *bfih6f, cf. behofian ; 
behoof, profit, use. Sth. ds. bihove, 
200, 7. 

bihofpe, sb., OE. *bih6f?y, f, cf. 

OFiis. behofte ; behoof, use, 204, 30. 
bih9lde(n), stv., OM. bihaldan (WS. 
healdan)-heold (R) ; behold, look on; 
inf bihglde, 36, 2 ; pt, sg. biheld, 
38, 3 ; pt.pl. biheld, 68, 20. Nth, 
see bihald. . eSth. pt. sg. biheold, 
196, 22. 

bih9t©(n), OE. behatan-bet (R); 
promise ; pt. sg. bihet, 85, 25 ; 
biheet, 220, 12; pp, bibgten, 82, 8 ; 
bebgten, 116, 22 ; bihi3t, 59, 13. 



GLOSSARY 


335 


bihove, see bihof. 
bili6ve(n), see beh6ve(n). 
bii (by), see bige(n). 
biing, sb., OE. bycging infl. by vb. ; 
buyingj atonement^ salvation^ 148, 

bike, sh,^ ongm uncertain; nest^ as 
of bees ^ 128, 26. 

biknowe(n), stv.^ OE. becnawan 
-cneow (R) ; acknowledge^ know ; 
pp. biknewe, 44, 16. 
bilSfde, see bilfve(n). 
bileeve, see bilfve(n). 
bilai, see bili§g:e(n). 
bilaven, see bilf ve(n). 
bilde(n), wkv.^ OE. byldan, byldan ; 

build \ pp, ibild, 42, 5. 
bile, sb.^ OE. bile ; bill, beak^ 16, 11. 
bilff, see bilfve(ii). 
bile5e(n), bilewe(n), stv,, OE. bi- 
leogan-leag (2); belie, calujimiatc'', 
pp. bilowen, 199, 13. 
bilf ove(ii), see bilfve(rL). 
bileve(ii), wkv., OM. belefan (WS. 
beliefan); believe; inf beleve, 122, 
4; pp, bileved, 213, 13. 
bil|ve(n), wkv., OE. belefan ; re- 
linquish, leave, remain ; inf, be- 
l|ven, 27, 9 ; pr, i sg, bil^ve, 184, 
I3|_ imp. sg. bilff, 41, i ; pt. sg. 
bilsefde, 185, 2 ; pt. pi. bilfvede, 
205, 27. ]Srth- pt. sg. bilevid, 163, 
30. eStb. inf. bilfofven, 184, ii ; 
pt.pl. bilaven, 183, 9. 
biligge(n), stv., Sth. = Ml. bille(n) ; 
OE. bilicgan-lseg (5); lie by, beset; 
pt. sg. bilai, 188, 10. 
bilive, see bel^e, 
bilive(n), stv., OE. belifan-laf (later 
1^, leaf) (i) ; remain, leaofe ; pt. sg. 
bilff, 24, 32. 

bille(n), wkv., OE. *billan ; hill, 
peck with beak j pr, 3 sg. billed, 16, 8. 
bil6ke(n), wkv., OE. belocian ; look 
at, look around; pr. pi. biloken, 
20. I. 

bilQken, see bil’uke(ii). 
bilgng, adj., cf. OE. gel9ng; de- 
pending, belonging, 21, 22. 
bilowen, see bile3e(n). 
biluke(n), stv., OE, bilucan-leac (2) ; 


shut in, close around ; pp. biloken, 
178, 25. 

biluvie(n), wkv., Sth. = ML bi- 
luve(n) ; OE. belufian ; delighted 
in, loved; pt.pl. biluveden, 184, 10. 
biinfne(n), w^kv., OE. bem^nan ; 
bemoan, lament ; pr. 3 sg. bimfneti, 
27, 2 ; pp. biment, 26, 10. 
bimfning, sb. < pr. ppL, OE. be- 
m^nan ; beuioanmg, lamentation, 
35>6. 

biment, see bimfne(n). 
binde(n), stv., OE. bindan (blndan) 
-band, bfnd (3) ; bind, fetter ; inf. 
binden, 26, 1 ; pt. sg. bfnd, 207, 8 ; 
pt.pl. btinden, 26, 24; pp. bunden, 
I37> bounden, 81, 20. 35Ttli* 
imp. pi. bindes, 138, 23; pt. pi. 
band, 140, 19. 

binf }?e(n), adv. prep., OE. beneouJan ; 
beneath, 41, 20; binf])e, 208, 8. 
eStb. bineo^en, 178, 30. 
binime(n), see benime(n). 
binne, adv. prep,, OE. bi^an ; 

within, in,%2,2%. 
binome, binume, see binime(n). 
biqu^e(n), wkv., OE. *bec\v»i5an 
< cwitJan ; lament, bewail ; inf 
biqufto, 34, I. 

bar, sb., ON. byrr, ‘strong wind*; 

force, speed, 142, 5. 
birSd, see biride(n). 
bird, see bir3(n) 

birde, sb., OE. gebyrd, f; birth; 

birde time, birth tivie, 17, ii. 
bire(n), wkv., OE. (ge)byrian ; 
belong to, behoove; pr. 3 sg. birr> 
(O), 8, 26; bird, 130, 16; birrd, 
31 ; P- sg- birde, 153, 19. 
bireoTiness^ ellE. = Ml, bi- 
rewnesse^ j&E, *bebreowness, f; 
commiseif^b^n, pity, igS, 
bireowse(3i), , wkv., eME. s^Ml. bi- 
rewse(i;i^; OE.behreowsian; repent; 
inip.pl. bireowse®, 196, 6. 
birx, sb., OE. byrig, ds. of burh; 
castle, city, 28, i. 

biride(n), stv., OE. berid^-rad (i); 
ride around, surround, besiege ; pt, 
sg. bir^ for birad^ 1:87, 13. 
biriele, see birigeles. 



33 ® 


GLOSSARY 


birie(ii) (berien), wkv*, OE. byrgan 
(byrigean); iuryi inf. birien, 33, 
8 ; biry, 68, 16 ; bene (Kt. ?), 245, 
^3 ; imp. fl. birie]?, 68, 29 , pt. pi. 
byrleden, 4, 32 ; biried, 70, 19. 
ISrtbL./^. sg. berid, 143, 10. 
birigeles, birisle, sb., OE. birigels ; 

burial, 34, 27 ; 35, 10. 
Birkabeyn, sb., ON. Birkibeinn (a 
niclmame) ; Birkab&in, 75, 4. 
birrd, birrj», see bire(n). 
birst, pp. or adj., OE. gebrysed < 
OE. brysan ; bruised ; bf tin and 
birst, beaten and bruised, 53, 30. 
biscop, sb., eME. = MI. bischop ; 

OE. biscop ; bishop, i, 5. 
biscume(n), wkv., Stb. = Ml. bi- 
scbnne(n) ; OE. bescunian \ shun, 
flee from, 180, 30. 

bise, sb., OF. l3ise; name of north 
•wind, 87, 9. 

bisec]i0(n), •whv.,QiE,. besecean-sohte 
(sohte) ,* beseech ; pr. i sg. bisechc, 
196, 20; pr.pl. bisechen, 45, 22. 
Ntb. sg. bisobt, 156, 8. Sth. 
pr. pi. bisecheth, 211, 15. 
bisekeing, sb. <,pr. pfl., OE. be- 
secan ; beseeching, imploring, 74, 8. 
bisemare, see bismere. 
bise(n), stv., ON; beseon-sseh (WS. 
seah) (5) ; oversee, look after ; inf. 
bisen, 24, 13. 
bisett, see besette(iL). 
biside, bisidQ(s), adv. prep., OE. 
bi side; beside, besides, 57, 5; by- 
sides, 223,_3. 

bisines, besynes, sb., OE. *bysignes, 
f. ; business, care, trouble ; besynes, 
144, 20 ; bysynes, 224, 24. 
bismere, bismare, sb., OE. bismer, 
neut.m.\ insult, evil, scorn, 55,18; 
bismare, 201, 19. 

bisne, sb. , OE. bisen, y; ; example, copy, 
10, 5 - 

bisobt, see biseebe(n). 
bisscbop, see biscop. 
bistfle(n), stv., OE. bestelan-stael 
(4) ; steal, steal away, pt. sg. bistal, 
188, I ; pp. bistolen, 176, 17. 
bistije, sb., OE. *bestig, f. or new 
cpa . ; path, way, ascent, 10 r, 4. 


bistolen, see bistfle(rL). 
bistrido(n), stv., OE. bestridan-strad 
(i); bestride \ inf. bistriden, 181, 

15- 

biswike(n), stv., OE. beswican — 
swac (i) ; deceive ; inf beswiken, 
6 , 17* biswiken, 19, 17 1 pi- 
(eME.) biswac, 187, 31. ^ 

bisy, adj., OE. bysig ; anxious, 
sorrowful, busy, 66, 15. 
bit, see biddern). 

bitaobe, bit^oben, see bitfcbe(n). 
bitaone(n), wkv., eMB. for bi- 
tgkne(n) ; OE. *bitacnian ; betoken ; 
pp. bitacnedd (O), 12, 28. Nth. 
pr. 3 sg. bytakens, 127, 22. 
bitagt(e), bita^t, bitabt, see bitf- 
cbe(n). 

bitake(n), stv., OE. bi (be) + ON. 
taka-t 5 k (6) ; commit, betake ; pt. 
sg. bitok, 67, 19 ; bitook, 231, 22 ; 
pp. bitake, 203, 24. 
bitakens, see bitacne(n). 
bitauote, bitangt, see bitfcbe(n). 
bite, sb., OE. hyit,f. ; bottle, flagon 
{originally leather) •, bollen as a 
bite, swollen as a bottle, 50, 6. 
bitfobe(n), bitfacbe(n), wku., OE. 
betKcean-taehte (tjehte) ; _ assign, 
deliver, commit*, inf. bit^che, 9, 
19; bitfehe, 43, 22 ; pt. sg. bitagte, 
24, II ; pp. betfht, 5, 7 ; bitagt, 
21, 7; bitajt, 43, 18; bitanst, 49, 
27. eStb. inf. bitfachen, 193, 8 ; 
pr. I sg. bitache, 190, 22 ; pp. 
bitaht, 193, 31. 

bite(n), stv., OE. bitan-bat (i); hite\ 
pt. sg. bgt, 66, 8. 
biter, see bitter. 
be(zL). 

bi]?encb©(n), bii 5 eiike(n), wkv., OE. 
biSencan-fehte (Sohte) ; think, 
bethink, conceive*, inf. bfSenken, 
16, 16; pt. sg. hifSo^e, 23, 19 ; 
bi]?05te, 208, I ; pp. biJoBt as adj., 
thoughtful, discreet, 36, 2 1 ; biJ)ofit, 
176, 8. Stb. bi])enche, 176, 6 ; 
pr. 3 sg. bi])enc?y, 177, 9. 
bitide(n), wkv., OE. betidan ; happen, 
betide ; inf. bitide, 39, 27 ; pr. 3 sg. 
bitid, 25, 21 ; pp. bitid, 31, 6. 



GLOSSARY 


337 


bitilde (n), wh;., OE. beteldan(?); 

cover ^ surroimd\ pp* bitild, 192, 26. 
bitime, adv» OE. *betima? ; bd^imes, 
promptly, 204, 6. 
bitok, see bitake(n), 
bit9kne(n), bit5ckne(n), wkv., OE. 
*bitacnian ; betoken ; /n 3 sg. 
bitgkne]?, 71, 8 ; betgckne)>, 212, 
27. 

bitook, see bitake(n). 
bitray, wkv., TTth. = ML bitraischen 
(bitraissen, betraien) ; OE. be(bi) + 
OF. trail ; betray ; pp. bitrayd, 
137, 3- 

bitter, bittre, adj., OE. biter j bitter, 
140, 16; bittre, 194, 16. 
bitterliche, adv., OE. biterllce ; 

bitterly, 67, 9. 
bittre, see bitter. 

bitternesse, sb., OE. bitemess, /.; 
bitterness, 202, 14. 

bitiiriiie(n), wkv„ Stb. = Ml. bi- 
tiirne(n; ; OE. *beturnian ; turn 
about ; pt» pU biturnde, 208, 7* 
bitwen, betwe(n), adv, prep,, OE. 
betweonan; between, among, 26, ii ; 
betwe, 95, 14; bytwene, 222, 2. 
bitwix, bitwixen, see betwix. 
bive(n), wkv., OE. bifian ; tremble', 
pr, 3 sg. hive's, 28, 24. Stb. mf. 
bivie, 182, 23. Cf. beovien. 
bivie(ii), see bive(n). 

adv, prep. Sth., = Ml. bi- 
f9re(n); OE.beforan; before', eSth. 
bivoren, 181, 17; bivgre, 206, 17. 
biwa.ke(n), wiev., OE. *bewacian ; 

watch over', biwaken, 33, 28. 
biwffe(ii), wkv., OE. bew^fan ; 

clothe ; pt, sg. biwgfde, 188, 26. 
biwende(n), wkv., OE. bewendan 
(wendan) ; turn away, turn around', 
pi, sg, biweute, 48, 6. 
biwepe(n), wlcv., OE. bewepan ; 

weep for ; imp. pi. biwepeS, 196,6. 
bewmde(n), siv., OE. bewindan 
(windan)“wand (wgnd) (3) ; wind 
abouty. surround', pp. biwunden, 

1 96. 30- 

biwreye(n), wkv., OE. *biwregan, 
cL wregan ; bewray, accuse j inf. 
biwreye, 243^ 27. 


biwunden, see biwmde(n). 
blac, adj., OE. blsec; black, 52, 24. 
Blais, sb., OF. Blois; Blois, 2, 7.. 
blame, sB,, OF. bl^me < blasme ; 
blame, 120, 20. 

blame(n), wirv. OF. blasmer, bl^mer ; 
blame ; inf. blame, 159, 14 ; pr, 3 
sg. blame]?, 202, 2. 

blasphemour, sb., OF. blasphemeur 
(or); blasphemer, 246, 5. 
Blauncbeflur, sb.,OY. Blancbefltir; 
Blanchefleur, 36, 15; gs. Blaimche- 
flures, 35, 26. 

blawe(n), siv,, eME., ISTtb. =* Ml. 
blowe(n); OE. blawan-bleow (R); 
blow', inf, blaw'e, 82, 31 ; pp. 
blawene, 144, 7. eSth. pr. 3 sg. 
blawetJ, 180, 16. 

ble, blee, sb., OE. bleo ; color, com- 
plexion, 52, I ; blee, 231, 25. 
blede(n) wkv., OE. bledan; bleed', 
pr.ppl. bledyng, 221, 23. 
bleike, adj,, ON. bleikr; pale, 79, 
9* 

blenoh.e(n.), wkv. , OE. blencan ; 
blench, flinch ; hif. blenche, 58, 12; 
pt. sg. blenchte, 195, 32. 
blende(n), wkv., OE. blendan, blen- 
dan ; make blind ; Sth.//. iblende, 
125, 33; yblent, 217, 2. 
blenke(n), see blynke(n). 
blesse(n) (earlier bletcen),blisoe (n), 
wkv., OE. bledsian, bletsian ; bless, 
cross oneself, blesse hem, cross them- 
selves ; inp. blesse, 123, 7 ; pr. i sg. 
blisce, 128, 19; imp, sg. blisce, 
104, 14 ; imp. pi. blisce]?, 105, 12 ; 
pt. sg. blessede, 205, 7 ; pp. (eME. 
bletced, 7, 31) blesced, 100, 15; 
blisced, 132, 19 ; blessyd, 94, i ; 
blissed, 228, 30. Sth. pp. yblisced, 
72, 21. 

blessyng, sb., OE. bletsang,/. ; bless- 
ing, 96, 3; blisceing, 69, 22 ; blis- 
cyng, loi, 17 ; blissing, 32, 14. 
bletcen, see blesse(ii). 
blepeliche, see blipelike. 
blfve(n), wkv., OE. bilsevan, Kt. 
bilevan ; remain ; Kt.pp. ybleved, 
217, 6. 

blevinge, sb., Kt. ~ Ml. bl|vinge ; 



338 


GLOSSARY 


OE. *belffivung, /. ; abiding^ exis- 
tence, 216, 27. 
blin, see bliiiiie( 3 i). 
blind, adj,, OE. blind, blind; blind, 
51. 25; blynde, 119, 7. 
blinn©(n), blme(n), stv., OE. blin- 
nan — ^blann (blgnn) (3) ; cease ; inf. 
blinne, 55, 30. ITth. inf. blin, 
130, 7. 

blis, blisce, see blisse. 
blisceing, bliscyng, see blessyng. 
bliscejj, see bl0sse(n). 
blisfol, blisful, OE. *blisfal; 
blissful, kap^, 219, 3 ; blisful, 
192, 30. 

blisfullich, adj., OE. *blisfullice • 
blissfully, 102, 23. 

blisse, blis, sb., OE. bliss, y. < bii])s 
[blrS] ; bliss, happiness, 7, 7 ; blis, 
38, 4; blisce, 211, 25. eStb, ds. 
blissen, 195, 6. 
blissing, see blessyng. 
bli^e, blyjje, blitb, adj., birSe ; glad, 
blithe, 31, 7; With, 139, 9. 
blipelik©, blipeli^, adv., OE. bliSe- 
lice ; gladly, blithely, 10, i ; bli]?eli5 
(O), 10, 21 ; bl5?])el5^, 94, 27. Kt. 
ble]7ellche, 21 1, 15. 
big, adj., ON. blar, cogn. with OE. 

blaw; livid, blue-blafk, 52, 24. 
blod, blood, sb., OE. blod ; blood, 
28, 21 ; blood, 238, 19. eStb. ds. 
blode, 189, 32. INth. bind?, 
146, 1. 

blodi, blody, adj., OE. blodig; 

bloody, 152, 2; blody, 228, 5. 
blodstrfm, sb., OE. *blodstream; 

stream of blood, 187, 2. 
blody, see blodi. 

bl6ine(n), wkv., ON. *bloina 1, cog- 
nate with OE. blostmian; bloom' 
pt. sg. blomede, 21, 25, 
blpndinge, sb., based on OF. blandir ; 

blandishing j flattery, 219, 5. 
bloodrf d, adj., OE, blodread ; blood- 
red, 229, 14. 

blowe(n), stv., OE. blawan-bleow 
(R) ; blow ; inf. bio wen, 62, 5 ; 
imp. sg. Won, 82, 29 ; pp. blowen, 
50, 14. 

blnde, blynde, see blod, blind. 


blynke(n), wkv., ON. *blinka, Dan 
blinke ; look, wink, blink, wake 
from sleep \ inf. blinke, 91, 31. 
INth. pt. sg. blenkit, 172, 23. 
bly]?e, see bli]?e. 
bly])ely, see blypelike. 
bl^e, adv., OE. be + life ; quickly, 
III, 4, 

b§, adj., OE. ba (begen) ; both, 38, 5. 
Cf. ba. 

boo, see boke. 

bochere, sb., OF. bochier; btitcher, 

hi* 18 . 

bocstaf, sb., OE. bocstaef; letter of 
alphabet ; bocstaff (O), 10, 7. 
bgd, bgde, see bide(n). 
bgde, sb., OE. gebod, neut.\ com- 
mand, request, message ; pi. bgdes, 
17, 28. eSth.//. boden, iSi, 4. 
bodede, see bodie(n), 
bgdeword, sb., OE. *bodword or new 
cpd.; message, 28, 26. 
bodi, Isody, sb., OE. bodig; body, 
17, 23 ; pi. bodis, 68, 16 ; bodies, 
221, 8. Stb. ds. bodye, 216, 14. 
b9dle(n), wkv., Sth. ~ Ml. bgde(n) ; 
OE. bodian ; announce, proclaim, 
speak', pt. sg. bodede, 186, 23. 
bodili, bodylich, adj., OE. *bodig- 
lice; bodily, 146, 16; bodyly, 146, 
26. Stb. bodylich, 216, 29. 
bgdyn, see bede(n). 
bogbt, bobton, see bige(n). 
boistduslych, adv., origin uncertain; 

boisterously, 221, 8. 
boke, boo (bok), sh., OE. boc, f ; 
book', boc, 9, i; boke, 15, 9; 40, 
3 ; 66, 28 ; bok, 67, 7. 
bold, sb., OE. bold, bold; house, 
building ; pL boldes, 196, 8. 
bgld, adj., OM. bald, bald, WS. 

beald; bold, 23, 25. 
bollen, pp. as adj., OE. belgan, 
swollen, 50, 6. 

bolne(n), boln, wkv., ON. bolgna; 

swell. Nth. inf. boln, 151, 18. 
bgn, bggn, sb., OE. ban ; bone ; pi. 

bggnys, 113, 18. Nth. ban, 139, 25. 
b§nd, see binde(n), 
bgnd, sh., ON. band, lOE. bgnd; 
bond, durance, 22, 12. 



GLOSSARY 339 


bgndaie, sd., OF. *bondage, ML. 

bondaginnns; bondage, 94, 15. 
bonde, bgnd, sb,, OE. bonda < ON- 
bondi; bondman, servant', bgnde 
manere, manner of a bondman, 94, 
22. nsrth. bgnd, as in phr, bond 
and free, 135, ii. 

bone, sb,, ON. bon, f, cogn. with 
OE. ben; prayer, boon, 16, 27. 
St'h.pl. bonen, 199, i. 

Boneface, sb., OF. Boniface ; Boni- 
face of Savoy, 226, 24, 
bord, sb., OE. bord, bord, neut. ; 
board, flank, table, side of ship ; 
ds. borde, 190, 7. 

borde, sb.. NF. horde, OF. bourde; 
jest, 122, 26. 

b9re(n), born, see bfre(ii). 
borh, sb., OE. borh, m . ; bail, security, 
paymeni, 195, 31. 
borrglienn, see berge(n). 

.borwe(n), wZ’z/., OE. borgian; receive 
on pledge, borrow, pt. sg. borwed, 

245» 10* 

bgst, bgste, sb., based on root of 
OE. began, * boast* 1; boast, 158, 
2 ; b99st, 242, I. 

bpsting, sb. < pr.ppl . ; boasting, 160, 
23- 

bpt, see bite(n). 
bot, bote, see bote, bnte. 
bote (bot), sb., OE. bot, f. ; help, 
remedy, salvation, 18, 12 ; bot, 54, 
II. INth. bute, 157, 14. 
hotel, OF.bonteille; bottle, 2^^, lo. 
b§pe (bg3e), bgthe, adj., prn., ON. 
ba])ir; both, also, 37,30; pi. (Sth.) 
bp^en, 21, IS- Cf. bape. 
bou^te, see bige(n). 
boun, adj., ON. pp, buinn ; ready, 
prepared, 139, i5; bdwne, 1 05, 22. 
bounden, see binde(n). 
bounte, bunte, sb., AN. bunt^, OF. 
bont^; bounty, goodness, 97, 13; 
bunte, 214, 12. 
boor, see bur. 

b6urde(n), wkv., OF. bonr^er; jest, 

1.42, 15- 

bouxomnes, see buxsumnes. 
bowande, see bowe(n). 
bowdraucht, sb., OE. boga + *draht? ; 


how-draft, distance a bow will carry, 
166, 19. 

bowe(n), siv., OM. bugan-beg (WS. 
beah) (2) ; bow, bend, turn aside, 
be obedie^it ; pr. ppl. bowande, 96, 

32. Cf. bu5e(n). 

bowes, bbwn, see bug, boun. 
box, sb., OE. box; box, 345, 8. 
Braband, Brabant, sb., OF, Braband, 
Brabant; Brabant, 161, 23; Bra- 
bant, 162, 8. 

brad (brade), braid, adj., eME. 
Nth. s= Ml. brpd ; OE. brad ; broad\ 
eME. brad, 190, 9; brade, 122, ii. 
INth. braid, 167, 26. 
brScon, see brfke(n). 
braid, see brad, breyde(n). 
braie(n), wkv., OF. braire ; bray, 
resouwi harshly ; pr. ppl. bra) mde, 
217, 25. 

brastlie(n), wkv., Sth. == Ml. brast- 
le(n) ; OE. brastllan ; rustle, crackle, 
make a noise', pr.pl, brastlien, i8g, 
29. 

brathly, adv., Nth. = Ml. brpthly ; 

ON. brabligr ; violently, 128, 13, 
braunohe, sb., OF. branche ; branch ; 

pi. braimches, 335, 22. 
braydf , see breid, 
brayinde, see braie(n). 
brfad, see brf d. 

brpadlpp = brfdlfp, sb., OE. bread 
+ leap, ‘ basket * ; bread basket, 2 2, 
14. 

bred, bredde, see brede(n). 
bredale, see bridale. 
brpd, sb., OE. bread ; bread, 21, 12; 
brfad, 22, 15 ; brfde, 89, 26 ; brggd, 
243» I- 

brfde, sb., Sth. == Ml. brede; WS. 
brade, OM. brede ; roast meat, 180, 
23- 

brfde. Nth. brede sometimes ; sb., 
OE. bradu; breadth', on bred, in 
breadth, stretched out, 140, 31. 
brfde(n),e£'^.,OE.br^dan; broaden, 
expand*, inf. brede, 133, 17. 
brede(n), wkv., OE. bredan; breed', 
pp. bred, 17, ii ; bredde, 53, 19. 
br^wrigte, sb., OE. bread H-wyrhta 
(wryhta); baker, bread-voright, 22,1 3. 


Z 2 



340 


GLOSSARY 


br§§d, see brfd. 

breflli. adv^j OF. brief + ME, -li; 
briefly^ 130, 6, 

breid, brayde, sb,., OE. brsegd ; rapid 
tfiovemenf, cunnings throw^ siraia- 
gem ; at a breid, rapidly, at a bound, 
60, 5. irth.. brayde, 140, 16. 
broken, stv., OE, brecan-brsec (4) ; 
break, tear up, violate ; inf, brgken, 
203, 11 \ pr.z sg, brfke]), 222, 6; 
pt. sg. brak, 69, 32 ; brakk, 112, 26 ; 
breke, with vowel of pL, 67, 32 ; 
pt, pi, (eME. br^con, 3, 13); 
broken, 69, 15 ; pp^ brgken, 18, i, 
Sth. /r.//. brekeS, 179, 2; pt.pl, 
brfken, 186, 31 ; pp. ibrgken, 203, 
II ; ibrgke, 204, 16. 
brekynge, sb., OE. brecnng, f, ; 
breaking, 146, 8. 

Brembre, sb., OM. Bremel, Brember? 

Brember\ Nicholas, 

333; I- 

breme, adj,, OE, breme; famous, 
excellent, ef, 24. ITth.brem, 152,30. 
bT§mli, bremly, adv,, OE. *breme- 
llce j fiercely, 152, 6. 
bren, brend, see brenne(iL). 
Brenicia, sb,, Lat, Bemicia, OE. 

Beornica rice ; Bemicia, 221, 31. 
bpenne(u.), wkv., ON. brenna ; burn ; 
br, ppl, brennynde, 6 t, 6; pt.pl. 
brendon, 3, 25, brenden, 83, 7 ; pp. 
brent, 1 1 1 , i ; brent?, 107,9. N th. 
inf.hx^vi, 15 1, 32;//.//. brend, 163, 
25* 

brenstgn, briinstgn, sb., OE. *bren- 
stan, cf. ON. brennistein; brimstone, 
sulphur, 217, 24; brimstgn, 62, 17. 
brent, see brenne(n). 
breoste, see brest. 
brere, sb., OE. brer; briar, 235, 24. 
brest (brest), sb., OE. breost ; breast, 
pi. brestess (O), 12, 5; pi- breste. 
41, 20; brest, 54, 12, eSth. //. 
breoste, 197, 21. 

brestatter, sb., OK breost + ator, 
atter; breast poison, 17, 14. 
brestfiltJe, OE. breost + fyl??,_/l ; 

breastfilth, evil in ike heart, 18, 20. 
Bretayne, sb., OF. Britaine, Bretaine ; 
Brittany, 116, 8. i 


brethere, brethere(n), see brother, 
bretherhgd, sb., OE. bro?Sor + had; 

brotherhood, 116, 18. 
br§JSren, see brother. 
brewe(n), brew, breu, siv., OE. 
breowan -breaw (2) ; brew, prepare', 
pp. browen, 57, 25. Nth. inf. brew, 
130, 4; breu, 149, 27. 
breyde(n), stv., OE. bregdan-brsegd 
(3) ; wrench, move, turn, act ; inf 
breyde, 50, 30 ; pi. sg. breyde, 93, 
31 ; braid, 195, 33 ; pt.pl. broiden, 
62, I. 

bribor, sb., OF. bribeur, NF.bribeor; 

thief, rascal, 221, 19. 
brid, sb., OE. bridd; bird-, pi. 
briddes, 19S, 23. 

brid, sb.,^ Nth. = Ml. bride ; OE. bryd, 
/; hHde, 159, 31. 

bridale (MS. briddale), sh,, OE. 
brydealo; bridal, bride feast, 46, 
26. Kt. bredale, 219, 8. 
bridel, sb., OE. brldel; bridle, 50, 
2r. 

bri5t, brigt, briht, adj., OE. bnlit; 
bright, 52, i; pi. brigt, 15, 26; 
brihte, 178, 19; bryghte, 144, i; 
comp, brihtre, 194, 33. 
brimstgn, see brenstgn. 
brin, stv.. Nth. — Ml. brinne(n) ; 
ON. brinna -brann (3) ; burn ; inf. 
brin, 141, 6. 

brings (n), wkv., OE. bringan-brohte 
(brohte); bring-, inf, bringen, 24, 
31 ; bringe, 41, il\pr, 1 sg. bringe, 
37; 4 ; 3 brinnge])> (O), ii, 

13 >pl- brohte, 4,15; bro5te, 38, 
25 ; pt. pi. brohten, 2, 2 ; pt. sbj. 
//. brohten, 186, 9 ; pp. brohht (O), 
8, 26 ; broght, 89, 28. Nth. pr. 
3 sg. brynges, 145, 3 ; sbj. sg. bring, 
157, 8. Sth. pp. ibroht, 207, 32 ; 
ibrojt, 38, 23 ; ybrou^t, 70, 23. 
Bristowe, sb., OE. Brycgstow, f ; 
Bristol, 5, 27. 

Britapi, Brytayn, sh. OF. Britaine ; 
Britain, 220, 12 ; Brytayn, 220, 
5- 

brith, sh.. Nth. « Ml. bir]?e; *gebry]7, 
cogn. with OE. gebyrd,j^ or ON. 
byr^J; birth, 130, 4. 



GLOSSARY 341 


BritSn, Bryton, sb.^ OF. Breton, 
Biiton; Briton -j pL Britons, 220, 
13; Brytons, 221, 24. 
br9d, adj.f OE. brad ; hroad^ 47, 3. 
brode, sb., OE. brod, f , : offspring, 
brood, 68, 26. 

brogh.t, brogte, see bring© (n). 
brohte(n), broblit, see bringe(n). 
broiden, see breyde(n). 
broken, see breke(n). 
brgnd, sb., OE. brand, brgnd [bren« 
nan] ; brand, 61, 26. 
brother, sb,, OE, broker ; brother, 5, 
23 ; broken: (O), 8, 13 ; pi. (eME. 
brelhere, 26, 7; bretJren, 196, 21); 
brethere, 117, 22; bretheren, 116, 
20. 

brouch, sb., OF. brochej brooch, 
234, 23. 

browen, see brewe(2i). 

Bruce, sb., Bruce \ Robert pe Bmce, 
170, I. 

Brushes (MS. Brig, Bnrgbes), sb., 
OF. Bniges; Bruges, 161, 8. 
bruke(n), stv., OE. brucan-breac(2) ; 
enjoy, brook ; inf. brukenn (O), 1 3, 
23 j brCike, 185, 18. 

Brut, sb., OF. Brut; Brutus, 126, 7. 
Brut, sb., Sth.«:Ml. Brit; OE. Bryt ; 
Briton', gpl. Briitten, 183, 31 ; 
Briitte, 184, 4; pi. Briittes, 184, 
30 - 

Brutlgnd, sb.^ OE. B^tenlgnd (Bryt- 
Ignd) ; land of Britain, England, 
183, 36. 

Briittaine, Briitaiue, sb., Sth. = Ml. 
Bretaine; OF. Bretaine, mod. by 
OE. Bryt, Bryten ; Britain, 184, 8. 
Cf. Britayn. 

Bruttisc, adj., Sth. = Ml. Brittish; 

OE. Brytisc; British, 1S3, 29. 
bryche, adj., OE. bryce; useful, of 
service, 96, 1 7. 
bryght, see bri^t. 
brynge(ii), see bringe(ii). 
brynige, sb., ON. brynja, OE.byme; 

coat of mail ; pi. brymges, 3, 7. 
Brytayn, see Bretayne. 

Bryton, see Briton, 
hue, sb., OE. buc; belly, paunch, 
abdomen, 195, 23. 


buckler, sb., OF, bucler; buckler, 
p. 282. 

biidel, sb., Sth. = Ml. bidel, bgdel; 

OE. bydel; beadle, 194, 22. 
bug = bu5, sb., OE. bohCg) ; bough ; 
pi. bnges, 21, 24; bbwes, 302, 
14. 

bu5e(n), buhe(n), stv., OE. bugan 
-beah ( 2 ) ; bozv, turn ,go;be obedmit ; 
inf. bu^e, 184, 8; buhen, 193, 26; 
Sth. pt. sg. bgh, 185, 26. Cf. 
boweCn). 

bulche, sb., OE. *bulce, cogn. with 
ON. bulki, MnE. bulk ; hump, heap, 
bunch, 60, 10. 

bulde(n), wkv., Sth. = ML bilde(n); 
OE. byldan ; build ; imp. pi. 
biilde??, 196, 8; pt.pl. biilde, 221, 
20. 

buldyng, sb., Sth. ■= Ml. bildinge, 
based on biilde(n) ; buildmg, 220, 3. 
bunden, see binde(n>. 
bundyn, adj. < pp. ME. bunde(n) ; 

bound, 169, 29- 
bunte, see bduntS. 
bur, bdur, sb., OE. bur ; bovier, ori- 
ginally the woman's part of the 
house, 35, 16; hour, 49, 7. eSth. 
ds. bure, 181, 12. 

Burch, see burh. 

b-iirde, sb., Sth. —Ml. bird© ; OE. 

*byrdu?; woman, 191, ii. 
bur5ewere, see burhwere. 
burgeis, sb., OF. burgeis; burgess, 
citizen, 42, 21. 

burh, burch, sb., OE. burh(g), f.*, 
town, borough, 6, 27; specifically 
’Bnich — Peterborough,!, 2. ©Sth, 

ds. burhae, 187, 17. 
burhfolc, sb., OE, *bnrhfolc; people 
of the town, citizens, 187, 36. 
burh3©, see burh. 

burhwere, OE.bnrhwaru; dweller 
in a city, citizen-, pi. burhweren, 
187, 7; bur^ewere, 187, 19. 
burn, sb., OE. buma, bume; brook, 
little stream, 1 68, 24. 
bume, see b©me(n). 
burst, adj., Sth. » ML brist ; allied 
to OE. b}Tst, sb., * bristle'; bristly, 
clothed with bristlet, 195, la, 



342 


GLOSSARY 


bur])tonge, ^ 3 . , Stli. « ML bir])tuiige ; 
0£. (ge)byrd4-tiingej birth tongue^ 
mother i 07 iguc ^ 224, 1 6. 
busk, OE. *biisc ?, cf. Dan. busk, 
LL. *buxicuiii; bush^ stalky 23, 
9 - 

buske(n), ON. buask, ^ get 

oneself ready ’ ; prepare^ adorn, 
disguise, go \ imp. sg. busk, 16 1, 8 ; 
pt. sg busked, 108, 4. 
busshel, sb., OF, buissel; bits 7 ul\ 
pi. busshels, 242, 8, 
bnsslmient, sb., OF. buscbement; 

a 7 iibush\ pi. busshmentz, 233, 19. 
but, bute, see bute(ii), bote. 
bute(n), later but, b6t(e), prep, 
conj., OE. butan ; but, except, ivitk- 
otit, 2, 6 ; buten, 16, 24; bute, 17, 
24 ; but, 26, 4 ; but if, except, 118, 
7, eStb. bute jif, 199 ? 33 ? l^^te, 
without, 177, 28. 

buteler, sb., OF. bouteillier ; butler, 
21, 19. - 

butere, sb., OE. butere, Lat. buty- 
ram; butter, 2*1 . 

bujj, see be(ii). 

butirfLi^e, sb. , OM. buttorflege(flige), 
WS. -fleoge; butterfly, 36, 25. 
buven, see abuven. 
buxsumnes, bouxomnes, sb., OE. 
buhsomnes,/ ; obedience, humility, 
127, 12; bouxomnes, 146, 29. 
by, see be, bige(ii), be(ii). 
by cause, adv* prep., OE. bi + OF. 

cause; because, 221, 7. 
byd(de), byddys, see bidde(n). 
byddynge, byddyng, biding, sb., 
OE. ’•'biddungjT^ \ praying, bidding, 
conmiand ; byddyng, 96, 30 ; biding, 
138, 25. 

byden, bydin, see bide(n). 
bye(n), see bige(n). 
byep, see be(n). 

byfialle(n), byfell, byful, byfyl, 
see bifalle(n). 

bygeoden, by^eode, see big9(n). 
bygynnyng, see biginning. 
byhalden, see bih.alde(n), 
byheste, byn, see bibeste, be(n), 
bylfve, sb., OE. *beleafe, geleafe; 
belief, 125, 34. 


bynk, sb., Ntb. *= ML benk ; ON, 
bennk; bench, 173? 26. 
byriede(n), see birie(n). 
byrtlien, sb., OE. byr^en ; burden, 
2? 5 * 

byscbopiyke, sb., OE. biscopnce ; 

bishopric, 113, 28. 
bysides, see biside, 
bys^es, see bislnes. 
bytaken, see bitaene(rL). 
bytwene, see bitwen. 
bytwixand, see betwix. 


0 . 

caas, see cas. 

cable, sb., OF. cable ; caldc, 86, 26. 

caclie(n), whz/., NF. cachier; catch; 
inf. cache, 325, 28. 

Cador, sb., OF. Cador ; Cador, 190, 
17. 

csese, sb., eME. == ML cbese ; OM. 
cese, WS. clese; cheese, 3, 27. 

Sseste, see chest e. 

Oeestre, sb,, eME. » ML Cbestre, 
Chester ; OE. Ceaster, Lat. castra ; 
Chester, 5, 19. 

Cai, sb. Kay, 1 26, 1 3. 

Cairn (Kaim), [Kalm], sb., OE. 
Cain with change of final consonant, 
or OF. *Caim ; Cam, 68, 10. 

caitif, j 3 ., NF. caitif; caitiff, wretch, 
63, 8; kaityf, 240, 12; pi. kaytefes, 

cakel, adj., ON. *kakel, cf. Swed. 
kackla?; cackling; kakel, 198, 18. 

cakele(n), wkv., ON., cf. Swed. 
kadda?; cackle; f«/ikakelen, 198, 
21; pr. ppl. kakeliude, 198, 24; 
pp. icakeled, 198, 27. 

calende, sb., OE. calend ; first of the 
7?wftth ; fort^de kalende of 
Mearch, the fourteenth dayfro77i the 
first of March, 197, 9. 

calls, sb., OF. (Picard) calice ; 
chalice, 203, 8. 

Calixtes, sb., Lat. Calixtus ; Calix- 
tus. Pope and Samt, 209, 19. 

ealle(n), wkv., ON. kalla ; call; hf. 
calle, 87, 30 ; pt. sg. kalde, 63, 28 ; 



GLOSSARY 


343 


kalled, 94, 9; callyd, 105, 21 ; 
cald, 135, 8. 

Cambria, sd., Lat. Cambria ; Cam- 
bria^ 223, 8. 

Camelford, sb,, Cavielford^ 109, 21 ; 

ds, Camelforde, 189, 22. 

Oampaine, sb,^ NF. Campaine ; 

Campa 7 iia^ 196, 32. 
carL = gan, see ginne(n). 
canceler, sb.^ NF. canceler, later 
displaced by OF. chancelere ; 
chancellor^ 2, 25. 

candel, eandel, sb^, OE. candel 
(candel), cpndel ; candle ; kandel, 
82, 29 ; //. candles, 5, 14, candelys, 
117, 2. 

oandelmasse, oandelmasse, sb., OE. 
Candelmsesse (candel -) ; Candehnas^ 

5 > 25. 

candelys, see candel. 
canon, sb,, OE. canon ; canon^ rule^ 
245, 29. 

canon, j 3., OF. (Picard) canone ; 
canon f prebendary \ pi, canSns, 
210, 3. 

Oantelow, sb., Cantehipe, Walter of, 
Bishop of Worcester, 227, i* 
Cantwarberi, sb,^ OE. Cantwarabuih 
(-byrig, Kt. -berig); Canterbury, 
5, 16 ; Caunterbiry, 231, 24. Sth. 
Kantebiirl, 226, 24. 
canunk, sb,, ON. kanunkr; canon, 
prebe^^ary ; gs, kaniinnkess (O), 8, 

17- 

capdn, sb», OF. capon, AN. captin ; 

capon ; pU capons, 244, 28. 
Oarausins, sh., Lat. Carausius ; 

^ Carausius, 221, 21. 
oajre, sb,, OM. cam, WS. ceam; care, 
sorrow, 39, 2; eME. kare, I77j 21. 
careful, adj\, OK cearful; full of 
care, careful\ eME. superl, kare- 
fnllest, 188, 27. 

carle (n), wkv., NF. carier; carry, 
info2i.TyQ,2zi, 15 ; pr.ppL cariynge, 
245, 14; caried, 239, 3. Sth. 
pp, ycaried, 242, 28. 
oaritedscarite]), sb,, NF. caritetli, 

' OF. caiite, charite, Lat. caritatem ; 

charity, almsgi’ving, 4, 13. 
pariynge, see carien. 


carl, sb, as adj,, ON. karl ; man, male: 
contemptuously, low, comfjion 7 na 7 t ; 
carl, 240, 21 ; carle, in, 25. 

Carliun, sb,, AN. Carliun j Laerleon\ 
Karliun, 1S8, 24. 

carlman, sb,, ON. karl, OE. man; 
male person, man*, pi, carlmen, 

3 j 3, 

carole, sb,, OF. carole ; carol, song\ 
karole, 215, 21, 

cart, sb,, ON. kartr, perh, OE. crset ; 
cart\ pi, carles, 31, lo. 

carye, see carle (n). 

cas, cas, sb,, OF. cas ; case, circum- 
stance, 68, 9 ; kas, 98, 7 ; case, 106, 
30; pi, caas, 225, 9; par cas, by 
chance, 245, 24. 

castelweorc, sb,, NF. castel + OE. 
•weorc; work of building castles, 
castle work', pi, castelweorces, 2, 

32- 

caste(n) , wkv,, ON. kasta ; cast ; 
inf, caste, 41, 19; pr, 3 sg. castej?, 
100, 22 j pt, sg, caste, 207, 7 ; pp, 
kast, 58, 19; cast, 245, 19. Nth. 
pr. 3 sg. castys, 143, 24; pp, casten, 
156, 2. Sth.//. icaste, 42, 4, Cf. 
keste(n). 

castel(l), sb,, NF. castel; castle \ 
castell, 308, 16; pi, castles, 2, 14; 
casteles, 76, 32. 

castynge, sb,<,pr,ppl., ME. casten; 
casting, hurling, 124, 29. 

castye, see caste (n). 

cat, sb,, OE. catt; cftt*, kat, 202, 28. 

catfl, oatelle, cateyl, sb,, NF. catel, 

OF. chatel*; cattle, property, 53, 7; 
catelle, 117, 27 ; kateyl, 94, 7. 

Cathenesia, sb,, Lat. Cathenesia ; 
Caithness, 220, 21. 

Catoun, sb,, AN. Catun; Cato, 216, 
15* 

oauersyn, kauersyn, sb,, OF. *cauer- 
sin ; money-le 7 ider, 88, i. 

Oannterbiry, see Cantwarbein. 

cause, sb,, NF. cause; cause. Nth. 
cans, 136, 26. 

caye, sb,, OE. cseg, cage; key, 
161, 22, 

Cayfas, sb,, Lat. Caifas ; Caiaphas ; 
gs. Cayfas, 137, 7. 



344 


GLOSSARY 


caysfre, ON. keisari ; ewperor\ 
kaysere, 75, 15; kayser, 162, 9; 
keiser, 192, 4- 

ce s= se. 

cffSj ^ee ofse(ii). 

ceudel, OF. cendal, sendal ; rich 
clothe 49, 6. 

cerge, sh,, OF. cirge; wax candle, 

certain, serta^pie, certane, adj,, 
adv,^ OF. certein / certain ; seitayne; 
14I, 13; INth, certaii?, 167, 21. 
certane, see certain, 
certes, certys, adv., OF. certes ; eer- 
tainly, 38, n; certys, 107, 16; 
sertis, 138, 10. 

Cesar, sK, OF. Cesar; Ccesar^ July 
Cesar, 126, 4. 

efse(n), wJ^., OF. cesser; cease, 
cause to cease \ inf. eggs, in, 27. 
cete, see cite. 

cete, sh., OF. cete ; whale, 19, 
cethegrande, sb., OF. cetegrande ; 
NF. cetbegrande; whale, 19, i. 

ch. « tf(tsh). 

chafflore, cheffare, sh., OM. *ceap 
fare ; chaffer, trade, 95, 25. Stli. 
cheffare, 203, 5. 
chald, see e^ld. 

chalys, sb., OF. chalice; chadice, 
covimunion cup, 122, 10. Cf. oalis. 
ehambre, see chamnbre. 

Ohanaan, j 3 .,Lat. (Vulgate) Chanaan; 

Canaan, 24, 29, 
chance, see chaunoe. 
ohanoun, sb., OF. chanoun, AN. 

canon ; canon, 75, 22. Cf. canon. 
ch§.nge(n), wkv., OF. changer; 
change', pt. sg. chayngede = 
changede, 224, 28; Nth. pt. 

changit, 170, 9. 

chapel, sb.fOY. chapele; chapel, 2^0, 9. 
char, see cher. 

chatremynge, sb., based on charmen, 
OF. charmer; enchant^nent, 145, 12. 
chare(n), whv., OE. cerran ; turn, 
go-, inf. charen, 33, ao; ^.1 sg. 
ch^e, 32, 6, 


Chari©, sh., OF. charge; charge, 
weight, 145, 5. 

charge(n), wkv., OF. chargier; 
charge, load, weigh down ; pp, 
charged, 89, 26. 

Charles, sh., OF. Charles, NF. 
Carl; Charles', Charles the Great , 
Charlemagne, 126, 15. 
ohartre, sb., OF. chartre ; charter, 

85, 34. 

ohartre, sb., OF. chartre; prism, 

charge, oharite, sb., OF. charite, 
NF. carite; charite, 31; chary- 
tee, 1 16, 12 ; charite, 127, 14. 
Cf. carited. 

chaser, sb., based on chasse(n) ; 

chaser, pursuer', pi chaseris, 169, 5. 
chass, sb., OF. chace; chase, 168, 27. 
chasse(n), wkv., OF. chacier ; chase', 
pr.ppL chassand, 169, 2. 
ohassing, sb., based on OF. chacier; 

chasing, chase, 168, 29. 
ohast(0), adj., OF. chaste; chaste, 
120, 3. 

ohastie(n), whv.fSth . « Ml.chaste(n) ; 
OF. chastier; chastise, chasten-, 
imp.pl. chastT 5e, aoo, 21. 
chastiement, sb., OF. chastiement ; 

chastisement, 200, 29. 
chastite, sh., OF. chastete ; chastity, 

127, 13. 

chaul, see ohavel. 

ohaumberlayn, sb., OF.chamberlene, 
-lain; chamberlain, 41, i. 
chaumbre, ehambre, sb., OF. 
ehambre ; chamber, 35, 23 ; chaum- 
bre, 49, 2 ; ehambre, 241, 6. 
chaunce, sb., OF, cheance; charue, 
90, 20. 

ehaunie, sb., OF. change; change, 

128, 7. 

chaunie(n), wkv., OF. changier; 
change', pr. i sg. chaunge, 37, 14; 
pr. pi. chaungen, 37, 30; pt. sg. 
chaungede, 45, 4; pp. chaunged, 
5 2, 29. Sth. pp. ychaunged, 2 24, 2 7. 
ohavel, chaul, sb., OM. cafl, WS. 
ceafl ; jaw, beak / talk, chatter ; 
chavel, 19, 15 ; chaul, 60, 17. 
■ eSth. chealie, 201, 7. 



GLOSSARY 


345 


ohayn^ede, see change (n). 
olieafle, see chavel. 
otifapxe(n),W/^.,Sth. = Ml.cli|pe(ii) ; 
OE. cheapian ; buy, sell ; j>r. 3 sg, 
ch|ape?y, 203, 5. 

oEfapild, sh.^ based on OE. ceap + 
nyld ; fond of bargainings a bar- 
gainers 203, 5. 
chefifare, see chafiraj:e. 
chfle, sb.s OM. cele, WS, ciele ; chills 
cold, 219, 6. 

clifofle(ii), wkv,, eME « Ml. ch|- 
vle(n) ; OE. *ceaflian, cf. LG. 
kavilen; chatters converse aimlessly', 
3 cli|ofled = chfofle'S, 200, 
10. 

cheoke, sb,, eME. == Ml. cbSce ; OE. 
ceoce ; cheeh Sth. pL cheoken, 
200, 10. 

cheose, see ch.ese(n). 
ctiepmon, sh., Sth. = Ml. chapman ; 
OE. ceapman ; merchant, chapman, 
203, 6. 

cher, char, sb., OM. cerr, WS. cierr; 
Uirn, time, piece ofwo'k) char, 53, 
16. Sth, dSn chere, 192, 9 ; cherre, 
I 97 > 17 - 

oherohe, see ohirche. 
chere, sb., OF, chere, chiere ; counten- 
ajtce, cheer (with change of meaning) , 
45, 4. Eth. cher, 155, 21. 
ch0ris8(rL), wkv., OF. cherir, pr, st, 
cheriss-; cherish \ cherise, 234, 

32. 

oherl, oherl, sb,, OE. ceorl ; husband- 
man, rustic, churl, 83, 33. 
cherre, see cher. 

ohese, sb., OM. cese, WS. clese; 

cheese, 84, 23. Cf, eME. cSse, 
Ohese(ii), stv,, OE. ceosan -ceas (2) ; 
choose', inf chese, 233, 13 ; pt. sg, 
ch|s, 130, 30; pt.pl. (eME cusen, 
8, i); chgsen, 76, 7; pp. (eME. 
cosan, 8, 4) ; chgsen, 102, 24, Sth. 
(eSth, inf. cheose, 220, 15); pp. 
icoren, 179, 15; icomee, 212, 26. 
cheste, sb., OE. cist, cest, f ; chest, 
box, 241, 5 ; eME, cseste, (MS. 
c?ste?) 3 , II. 

chf ste, ohf st, sb., OE. ceast, f ? ; 
strife, contention', chfst, 68, 17. 


ehesun, chfson, sb., AN. acheistin, 
OF. (-on) ; occasion, ^iiotive, 91, 5 ; 
chfson, 145, 26, _ 

ehesynge, sb., OE. *ceosung, f\ 
choosing, 117, 30. 

chewe(n), stv., OE. ceowan -ceaw 
(2) ; chew ; pr. sbj. chewe, 122, 14. 
chilce, sb., OE. *cildse ; childishness, 
puerility, 176, 7. 

child (ohyld),//. ehilder (childre), 
children; OE. cild; child', eME, 
cild, 4, 29; childe, 163, 20; pi. 
ehilder, 24, 21; chyldyr, 116, 4; 
gpl. without ending, ehilder, 69, 
12; children. So, 6. Sth.^/r. childe, 
176, 24; pi. children, 202, 18; chil- 
dem, 225, 6; chyldern, 224, 17. 
childhfde, jA, OE. cild, cild + *h^e ; 

cf. OE. cildhad; childhood, 214, 2. 
Childrich(e), sb., OE. *CildrTc; 

Childrich, 185, 17. 
chirche, sb., OE. cirice ; church, 72, 
30; eME. circe, 3, 32 ; cherche, 
88 , 6 . 

chirchegong, sb., OE. cyrice + gang j 
church-going, church-service, 34, 


chirchejjnrl, sb., Sth. ~ Ml. chirche- 
])irl; OE. cyrice + }>yrl; church 
window', ds. chirchej^iirle, 199. 21. 
chirch-hay, sb., OE. cirice + hege, 
‘hedge, enclosure*; churchyard, 
124, 25, 

chpsen, see ohese(n). 

chfst, sb., OE. ceast becoming ceast? ; 

dispute , strife, 125, i . 
chyldyr, see child, 
chyrche, see ohirche. 
ohyrehe^frd, -5frde, -^orde, sb., OE. 
*ciricegeard (geard) ; churchyard, 
88, 6 ; eME. cyreei^rd, 3» 32 ; 
chyreh^jorde, 124, 32. 
chytering, sb,, based on chitere(n) ; 

chattering, 224, 15. 
oh3rvalr6us, adj., OF. chevalereus; 

chivalrous, 114, 29. 
ciclatun, AN, ciclatun ; ciclatoun, 
sort of mch cloth, 192, 27. 
cild, 6iroe, see child, chirche. 
oircewican, eME. for chirchewiken, 
OE. cirice + wice, wkf.^ office of the 



34 ^ 


GLOSSARY 


churchwarden \ circewican, 4, 20. 
Cf. wiken. 

oit§ (oyte), site, sd,, OF. cite ; 

73, 24; cyte, 106, 3; site, 32, 31. 
isrtli. cete, 135, 6, 
clad, cladde, sec el9])3(ii). 
elane, adv,^ OE. cl^e (claae) ; 
wholly, clean (in dial. English), 
183^ 9* 

danse (n), wkv,, OE. clsensian by 
shortening ; cleanse ; inf. danse, 
122, iS. Cf. clense(n). 

Clare, sb., OF. Clare ; Clare, Richard 
of, 227, 2^ 

Clarice, Claris, sb., OF. Claris; 
Clarice, 36, 31. 

cla|>, cla})©, sb., eME., = 
cl9>; OE.claff; cloth, garment, pL 
clothes, 150, 12; pL cliit?es, 192, 
27. 

dause, sb., OF. danse; clause, sen- 
tence, 155, 29« 

elauwe, olawe, sb., OE. clawu; claw, 
60, II ; clawe, 231, 23. 
day, OE. clseg; clay, 50, 12, 
clff, see cl©ve(n). 

dfne, clfn, adf, OE. cl^ne ; clean, 
pure, chaste, 33, 23. llSTth. d|n, 
^57s 3- 

denliche, adv*, Sth. ="M1. clenli; 

OE. cl^nlice; cleanly, 219, 31, 
dennesse, sb., OE. clSnness, f.\ 
clean 7 iess, chastity, 232, ir. 
dense (n), wku., OE. clSnsian ; 
cleanse', inf. dense, 102, i. ISTtli. 
inf. dens, 156, 10. Kt. pr, 3 sg. 
den2e>, 217, 16; pp^ ydenzed, 
218, 8. 

cleopien, see dfpG(n). 
clfp©(n), whu., OE. cleopian (di- 
pian) ; call\ inf clgpe, 222, 26; 
pt, sg, clfpede, 41, i ; pt. pi. (eME.) 
depeden, 3, 23; pp. dgped, 39, 
29. StE. inf, (eSth. cleopien, 187, 
33); pr, pi clfpieth, 211, 17; 
c]|pej>, 222, 24; pr. sbj, pi. clfpie, 
211, 14; imp. sg. dfpe, 212, 12; 
imp. pi. (eSth. cleopetJ, 196, iij; 
pt. sg. (eSth. deopede, 184, 4) ; 
pp, ydfpnd, 221, 6; Cf, StE. 
olupie(n). 


cleppe, sb,, StE. ~M 1 . dappe; OE, 
*cl^ppe ; cf. MDu. kkppe, kleppe ; 
clapper, 200, ii. 

cleppe(n), ze;/^.,Kt.«Ml.dippe(n); 
OE. clyppan ; embrace', inf. deppen, 

40, 20 ; pr. pL deppen, 39, ^ \ pt. 
pt. klepte, 37 > 32; StE. pp. iclept, 

41, 8. 

clerc, see clerk. 

der(e). adj., OF. der. clier; clear, 
excelleni, 10 1, 9. 

cleriie, sh., OF. clergie; leammg, 
216, 12. 

clerk, sb., OE. deric, infl. by OF. 
clerc ; clergyinan, scholar, clerk-, 
clerc, 8, 2. StE.^/. clerken, 309,17. 

clfve, sb., OE. cleofa ; ckat?iber, den, 
house, 82, I. 

cleve(n), stv., OE. deof^-deaf (2) ; 
cleave, split*, pi. sg. cl|f, 5^? 24. 

olimb©(ii) ,4‘/r.,OE. climban (dimban) 
-clamb (dpmb) (3); climb inf, 
dimben, loi, 14; pr. sbj. pL 
dimben, 201, 13. 

clive(ii), wkv., OE. clilian ; adhere, 
cleave, belong', pr. 3 sg. clivetS, 31, 

32. 

diver, adf., OE. clibbor ? ; tenacious, 
bold, 18, 25. 

clocEe = oluoEe, sb., origin uncertain; 
clutch, 60,6. 

clpp, sb., OE. clafS; garment, pi. 
clothes', dp]??, 93, 6; clpj^es, bed- 
clothes, 41, 19. 

cl9pe(n), wkv., OE, cla^Jian ; clothe-, 
pp. sg. dgjjede, 77, 23 ; pp. cl^^ed, 
17, 17; clad, 23, 3/|. StE. pp. 
yclgtied, 231, 25. 

clpping, sb., based on OE. cla??; 
clothing, 92, 27. 

clout, clowt, see clut. 

cloyster, sb. or adj., OF. doistre; 
cloister, 154, 5. 

Climie, sb., OF. Climie; Cluny, dep. 
Sa6ne-et-Loire, i, 3. 

clupie(n), wkv., StE. » Ml. dipen 
(clepen) ; OE. dypian ; C7y out, 
call ; inf. diipie, 206, 3 ; pp. 
icliiped, 179, 15. 

cluse, sb., OE. clus, f, ; enclosure, 
dam (of a mill), 20T, i. 



GLOSSARY 


347 


clut, clout, clo^, sd.j OE. clut; 
clout, rag\ pi. elutes, 81,22; clout, 
57, 8 ; clowt, 241, 7. 
clyf, sd., OE. clif (cleof) ; cliff, 222, 
14. 

elynke(ii), whv., cf. MDu. clinken ; 
clink, ring as a bell; inf. clynke, 
239 » 2. 

cnave, sh., OE, cnafa; hoy, servant, 
54, 28 ; knave, 82, ii. 
cnawe(n), see knawe(n). 
cnilit, sb., OE. cniht; hiight, 181, 5. 
cxLOtted, pp. as adj., OE. cnottod < 
cnottian ; knotted, 3, 8. 
cgf, adj., OE. caf ; swift, eager, hold, 
^7? ^7 5 3^® cgve, the swift one, the 
thief ’i, 198, 22. 

coine(n), wkv., OF. coigner; coin; 

St'h.pp, ycoynetl, 242, 7. 
cok, sh., OE. c 5 c; cook; pi. cokes, 
49 > 9 * 

cgld, adj., OM. cald, cald, WS, ceald ; 
cold, 39, 4; kgld, 77, 19. eKt. 
chald, 218, 6. 

c6He(u), wkv., Stk. = Ml. cole(n) ; 

OE. colian; become cool, cool ; pt. sg. 
colede, 19.^, 17. 

colter, sb., OE, culter, Lat ailter ; 
colter, 60, 23. 

com, c6m(an), see cume(n). 
com, see come. 

eomaiide(n),2£F>^., OF. commander; 
command; pr. 1 sg. comand, 69, 
22; pt. sg. coalman dede, 222, 26; 
cumand, 163, 17 ; pp. comarinded, 
235? 2. 'Nih.. pr. ppl. comand, 15 1, 
5 J comand, 140, 20, 
comandement, comandment, sb., 

OF, comandement ; covmiand?nent, 

engagement; comandement, 69, 15; 
comandment, 67, 32 ; cumand- 

ment, 163, 14 ; pi. commande- 
mentes, 144, 8 ; comaundement, 
234, 4 - , 

eomauiide(n% see comaiide(ii). 
comaundement, see comandement. 
Q6me,sh., OE. *come,* cf. ON kvama, 
f; coming, arrival, 11, 6. Nth., 
com, 133, 3. 
c6me(n), see oume(n). 
coming, see cume(n). 


comly ng, sh., OE. *cumelimg?, cf. 
OHG. chomeling ; new comer, 
stranger, 225, 13. 
comm, see cume(n). 
commandement, see comandement 
commun, comdne, adj., AN. cumun, 
OF. comon ; common, 133, 26; co- 
mone,i47,i4; in commune, 
all together, 233, 23 ;//. as sb. com- 
munes, commons, 233, 12. 
commyxstion, sb., OF. commistion, 
AN. commistiun, infl. by Lat. com- 
mixtio; commingling, 224, 13. 
comon, see cume(n). 
comone, comoun, see commun. 
compaignye, company, sb., OF. 

compaignie ; co7npa7ty, 237, 7. 
companye(n), wkfv., OF. com- 
paignier ; accompany, meet together ; 
inf companye(n), 234, 11. 
compelle(n), wkv., OF. compeller; 

compel; pp. compelled, 224, 18. 
compile(n), wkv., OF. compiler; 

compile; pp. compiled, 234, 23. 
compleyne(n), wkv., OF, com- 
pleindre ; complaht ; pr. pi, com- 
pleynen, 232, 20. 
corns, comp, see cume(n). 
cornu ne(n), wkv., AN. communier; 
commune, converse ; pr. ppl. corniin- 
yng, 336, 15. 

comunlych, comunlik, adv., AN. 
comim + ME. llche ; commonly, 93, 
15. Ntli. comunlik, 133, 28. 
Comyn, sb., Comyn; Jgn jie, 159, 
29. 

eomvn, see cume(n'). 
con, conne, see cunne(n). 
coneeive(n), wkv., NF. conceivre, 
OF. concoivre ; conceive, beget ; pt. 
sg. conceived, 102, 6 ; pp. conceived, 
102, 5. 

Concepcion, sb., OF. conception; 

conception, conceivmg, 133, lo. 
concyence, concyens, conscience, 
sb., OF. conscience ; conscience, 144, 
9 ; concyence, 146, x ; consciens, 
I55» 3t. 

condicion, sb., OF. condicion ; condi- 
tion, 220, 14, 
cone, see ounne(n). 



34 ^ 


GLOSSARY 


oonfederat, adj.^ Lat. confederatns ; 

coivfederaU, associated with^ 22^, 7. 
ooiiferme(n), wkv.^ OF. confermer; 
confirm ; imp. sg. conferme, 102, 
15 - 

confiture, sl.i OF. confiture ; preserve^ 
confection^ 245, i. 

confort, sb.i OF. confort; comfort, 
160, 3, 

conforte(n). who., OF. conforter ; 
comfort \ pi, pi. conforted, 3 01, 6. 
Nthi, pr. 3 s^. confortes, 15 1, 2; 
pp, confort, 140, 32. 
conf5unde(n), wJkv., OF. confundre; 
co7tfouitd, injure, destroy ; ITtli. pr, 
pi, confoundes, 147, 6. 
confusion, sh., OF. confusion ; con- 
fusion, 23^17. 

congregacioTmCen'), wkv., based on 
AN. congregatiun ; assemble, 1 1 8, 

25* 

conneCn^^i?^ ciiiine(n). 
eonquerour, sb,, OF. conquereiir; 
conqueror, 126, 3. 

conquest, sb., OF. conqueste; con- 
quest, 225, 2. 

consail, oonseil, see conseyL 
consoieus, see oonoyence. 
c6ns8ilie(ii), wko., St]i.*=Ml. con- 
seile(n) ; AN. cunseilier, OF. con- 
seilier ; counsel ; inf. conseili, 304, 
21;' pt, sg. conseilede, 206, 16; pt. 
pi. conseilede, 205, 28. 
consent! (n), wkv., Sth. ==- Ml. con- 
sente(n); OF. consentir; consent', 
inf. consent!, 217, 31. 
conseyl, consail, sb., OF. conseil, 
AN. cunseil; counsel', conseyl, 100, 
244 conseil, 204. 15; conseHle, 
236, 7 ; cdnsayl, 46, 32. Cf. coun- 
seil. 

Constantin, sb., OE. Constantin ; 

Constantine, 190, 18. 
construccion, sb., OF. constmction ; 

constructio 7 i, 224, 28. 
constr‘ue(n), wkv„ OF. construire; 
co 7 istrue, explain, translate ; mf. 
construe, 224, 19; pr. pi. construe]), 
3 - 

oontemplacyone, sb.. OF. contem- 
placion; conte^nplation, 145, 7. 


contemplaytyfe, adj., OF. contem- 
platif; conteynplaivue, 14^^ 
contenanss, see cuntenaunee. 
conteyiie(n), wkv., OF. continir, 
*conteinir ; contain, inchuie ; pr. 
3 sg. ; conteyne]), 221, 28. 
centre, eontray (contrei), sb., OF. 
cuntree; coimtry, 37, 16; contree, 
239> 14; eontray, 221, 31; pi. 
contrays, 220, 6; contieie, 205, 
32 ; cunlre, 98, 8. 

eontrycydn, sb., OF. contricion, AN. 
contriciim ; cotttriiion; contiycyone, 
123, 23. 

oontynue(n), wkv., OF. continuer; 

mttinue', pp. contynued, 234, 25. 
convert© (n), wkv., OF. converter; 
convert', pt. sg. convertid, 135, 4; 
convertede, 221, 30 ; converted, 


102, 17. 

conveye(n), wkv., OF. conveier; 


convey, 230, 19. 

cqpe, sb., ON. kapa, LL. capa; cope, 
61, 5. 

cora^eus, adj., OF. corageus; courage- 
ous, 206, I. 

coreocion, sb., OF. correction; cor^ 
rection, 23d, 8. 

com (corn), sb., OE. com; com, 
grain, 3, 27. 

cdrnl9nd, sb., OE. com + l§nd ; coi'u 
land, 225,32. 

Comwal, Oornwaile, sb., OE. Corn- 
weal ; Cornwall ; ds. Com wale, 
188, 32 ; Cornwalen, pi. ?, 18S, 9 ; 
Comwaile, 290, 17; Jghan, 224, 


27. 

coroune, sb., AN. corune ; crown, 
227, 19. Cf. croune (crune). 
coroune(n), wkv., ^F. coruner; 
croi^7z ; pr. 3 sg. coroune]), 216, 30; 
pp. corouned, 229, 31. 
corrupt, adj., OF. corrupt ; corrttpt, 
238, 22. 

cors, sb., OF. cors; corpse, corse, 
body, 1 18, 13. 
oorsed, see ourse(n). 
corsur, sb., origin uncertain, cficorser, 
N.E.D. ; dealer hi hoj'ses, 108, ii, 
cos, sb., OE. coss; kiss, 196, 21, 
ooaan, see olifse(n), * 



GLOSSARY 


349 


cosin, sb.y OF. cosin ; cousin y relaiimy 
204, 28. 

cost, sb., OF. coste ; expense^ at here 
comoiin cost, at their expense in 
coinmoHy 1 1 8, 24, 

C9Ste, sb.y OF. coste ; coasty 220, 9^ 
costnie(iL), wkv.y ON. kosta ex- 
tended?; costy expend \ pr. 3 sg. 
costnej), 219, 20. 
costome, see custome. 

GgtOj sb. OE. cote ; cote, coty 87, 22. 
e9te, MS. colte, sb.y OE. colt ; colty 
6t, 12. 

Ootingham, sb.y Cottinghani (North- 
ampton), 4, 23. 

cotmseil, edunsayle, sb.y AN. cun- 
seil; counsely 100, 15; counsayle, 
I lOy 5 ; counsail, 200, i S. 

GOUTS, see curs. 

court, sb.y OF. cmt; eourty 50, 17; 

_cuit, 7,_32j courte, 125, i. 
couth., coupest, see cunne(n). 
covayt3(n), whv., OF. cuveiter; 
eoz/et; Nth. inf. covayte, 147, 27 ; 
pr. 2 sg. covaytes, 135, 23 ; pt. sg. 
covayted, 140, 2; pp. covayt, 139, 

32. 

cpre, see ogf. 

covenaunt, sb.y OF. covenant ; cove- 
nant, agreement ; at the covenaunt ; 
with the agreement y 221, 3. 
covent, sb.y OF. convent, covent ; 
convexity monastery y order of monks y 

covertoure, sb.y OF. coverture; 

covering, bedclothes, 49, 5. 
coveytise, sb.y OF. coveitise ; cove- 
tousness, 54, 14. 

ooveytous, adj., OF. coveitous ; 
covetous, 88, 23. 

cdwlte, sb.y OF. coulte, cuilte ; quilt, 
49 . 5 - 

oradel, sb., OE. cradol ; cradle, 224, 
22. 

craft, sb.y OE. crseft; power, skilly 
crafty i ^y 6 . 

craftilik, adv., OE. crseftiglice ; 
powerfully, wonderfully, craftilyy 
12 , 1 , 4 - 

crafty, ae^\f OE. crseftig; crafty, 
skilful, 129, 4, 


crake(n), craklE:e(n), wJcv., OE. 
cracian; crack \ pt. sg. crakede, 82, 
12. ETth. inf. crak, 160, 24 : pp. 
crakked, 159, ii. 

crave(n), wkv., OE. crafian ; crave ; 
inf craven, 31, 14; crave, 54, 26; 
pt. ^ cravede, 84, 1 3. 
crfatour, sb., OF. creatoiir ; creator, 
246, 8. 

crfatitre, sb., OF. creature ; creaiuj'e, 
creation, (>2, 26. NFh.pl. crgatura, 
144, 23. 

crede, sb., OE. creda, Lat. crMo; 
creed, 16, 25, 

creoissen (croissen), wkv., OF. 
croiser ; cross, sign with the cross ; 
imp. pi. CTtoiie^y 197, 20. 
crepe(n), stv., OE. creopan-creap 
(3) ; creep; pr. 3 sg. crepe‘0, 17, 6. 
Nth. inf crep, 152, ii. 
cri, cry, sb., OF. cri ; cry, 62, 22. 
crie(ii), wkv.y OF. crier; cry; inf. 
crie, 36, 6; crye, 105, 23; pr. pi. 
crien, 41, 31 ; pr. shf. crie, 198, 33 ; 
pr. ppl. criende, 60, 15; pt. sg. 
cried, 104, 10 ; pt. pi. criede, 206, 
19. 

cripele(n), wkv., based on OE. 
cryppel ^ go as a cripple ; pr. ppl. 
cripelande, 17, 6. 

crisme, sb., OF. cresme; Chrism, 
sacred oil, 34, ii. 

Orissten, see Cristen, 
crisstenndom, see cristenddm. 
crisstned, see crist 3 ie(ii). 

Crist, sb.y OE. Crist, I^t. Christns, 
through OIr. Crist : Christ, i, 8 ; 
Crystys, 88, 5. Nth. gs. Cristis, 
135, I ; Sth. ds. Criste, 176, 20. 
Cristen, crystyn, adj., sb., OE 
cristen ; Christian, 4, 29 ; pi. 
Crisstene (O), 10, 13, crystyn, 
146, 6. 

orxstendom, sb., OE, cristendom ; 
Christendom ; Crisstenndom (O) . 
8, 14 ; crystendom, Christianity, 
salvation, 65, 9 ; 94, 24, 
Cristenmesse, sb., OE. cristen + OF. 

messe; Christmas, 229, 21. 
oristiente, sb., OF. chrestianite, 
cnstianite; cristendom, 228, 32. 



350 


GLOSSARY 


eristne(n) ; wkv.^ OE. cristnian; 
christen \ pp, crisstnedd (O), 13, 
26. 

oristninge, sb., based on cristne(n) ; 

christenings 2 1 8, 4. 

Cristofer, sb.^ OF. Cristopher ; 

Christophers 164, 7. 

Orislms, Lat. Christas ; Christs S, 
II. * 

croiee, croyoe, sh.s OF, crois ; cross, 
133* I ; croyce, 139, 22. 
croked, pp. as adj., ME. croke(n) : 
crookeds 241, 32. 

cro2iycle(n). wkv., OF. croniqner, 
*cronikler; chronicles record ^ pp. 
cronyclyd, 116, 7. 

CTOS, sb., OIr. cross, through ON. 

l^oss; cross, 136, 23. 
oroune, erune, sb., AN. comne ; 
crown, 82, 12; crowne, 105, 19; 
crune, 194, 33. Cf. ocrune. 
croune(ii),«/-^z'., OF.coniner; crown\ 
pr. 3 sg. crounej?, 104, 19. 
orowne, croyce, see oroune, oroioe. 
oruoethus, sb., origin of first part 
unknown ; torture house, 3, ii. 
crucyfie(n), wkv,, OF. crucifier ; 

krucify\ pp. cruciflede, 145, 23. 
oruninge, sb., based on crune(n) ; 

crownings reign, 226, 23. 
cry, er5e(n), see cri, erie(n). 
crystendom, ste cristendoin. 
crystyn, Crystys, see Cristen, Crist, 
cu, ku, sb,, OE. cu ; com} j gs. kues, 
202, 31. 

cumandment, see comandmenti. 
cumand, see oomande(n). 
cuine(n), stv,, OE. cuman-com 
(cwom) (4); come', inf. cumen, i, 
17; cnme, 39, 16; com, 74, 13; 
prn 3 sg, cnmeiS, 15, ir; com]?, 89, 
12 ; pr. pL cumen, 19, 13 ; cume 
ge, 25, II ; comen, 58, ii ; pr. sbj. 
sg. come, 52, 8 ; pr. sbj.pl. cumen, 
226, 18; cume, 180, 2; imp. sg. 
cum, 37, 24; pr. ppl. cominge, 39, 
31 ; pt. sg. com, I, I ; comm (O), 
II, 17; cam, 23, 7 ; kam, 15, 3 ; 
pt. pi. (eME. comen, 2, 16) ; come, 
63? 30 ; pt. sbj. sg. come, 8, 7 ; pt. 
sbj. pi. (eME. c6man, 4, 3) ; comen. 


185, 22 ; pp. cumen, 2, 7 ; comyn, 
no, 13. Nth./r. 2 cums, 141, 
25; 3 corns, 127, 19; pr. 

sbj. sg. cum, 14 1, 30; pr. ppl. 
cumand, 149, 4; pp. cumin, 170, 
32. Sth. ger. cumene, 214, 24; 
pp. icumen, 183, 23 ; icume, 40, 
31; icome, 44, 26; yeomen, 73, 
20. 

cumpaignie, cmnpaynie, sb., AN. 
cumpaignie ; company, co7npanion’‘ 
ship, 38, 22; cumpaynie, 56, 21 j 
cumpany, 117, 15. 
oumpany, see cumpaignie. 
eumpasse(n), wkv., AN. cumpasser; 
compos, surround, protect ; late ME. 
inf. cumpas, 103, 37. 
emus, see ounie(n). 
eumyiig,r^.,OAng.*cumung; co7ning, 
141, 23. 

cun, sb., Sth. = Ml. kin; OE. cynn; 
km, khid, race ; ds. ciinne, 184, 12 ; 
gpl. ciinne, 184, i. 

ciinne(n), ptprv., OE. cunnen-cu^e ; 
know, be able, can ; inf, kunne, 38, 
9 ; cone, 55, 10 ; pr. i, 3 sg. can, 
3, 20 (WMl. conne, 125, 22); con, 
168, 19 ; kan, 243, 2*1 pr. 2 sg. 
kanst, 70, 2 ; pr. pi. cunnen, 4, 9 ; 
connen, 51, 25; kunne, 78, 6; 
konne, 235, 31 ; pr. sbj, sg. cunne, 
14,6; cune, 18, 10; cone, 84, 2; 
conne, 210, 15; pt. 1, zsg. cuthe, 
5, 19; ku?ye,_i98, 17; kude, 23, 
coujest, 49, 29 ; pt. pi. 
kou]?en, 76, 4; kutJen, 201, 4; pt. 
sbj. sg. coude, 89, 16. Nth, pt. sg. 
couth, 167, 21 ; kouth, 136, 21. 
Sth..pr. pi. conne]), 225, 7. 
cuntenaunce, sb., AN. cuntenance; 
countenance, expression, 38, 4. 

Nth. contenanss, 170, 9. 
ountesse, sb., AN. cuntesse, OF. con- 
tesse; countess, 5, 31. 
cuntraye, cuntre, see contre. 
cupe, sb., OE. *cupe; basket, 35, i8; 
pi. cupen, 35, 15. 

cuppe, eupe, sb., OE. cuppa; cup, 
29, 22 ; kuppe, 21, II ; cupe, 46, 5. 
cur, sb., OF. curre, cure ; chariot, 192, 
26 ; ds. cure, 192, 24. 



OLOSSARY 


35i 


oiiratoure, OF. curateur ; curator, 
1 19, 16.' 

Ourbuil, OF. Corbuil, Corbeil ; 
Curbeuil {Curbuil, Corbeil) \ Wil- 
liam of, Archbishop of Canterbury, 
2, 9. 

curs, sb., OF. curs, cours; course, 
attack, assault, regard \ 103, 30- 
Ifthu h^den in curs, hold in regard, 
128, I. 

oursednesse, sb,, based on curse (n) ; 
cursedness, 246, 2. 

o\irse(n), wkv., OE. cursian; curse', 
inf, curssen, 66, 1 2 ; ft. sg. cursede, 
6, 4 ; ft, fl, cursede, 4, 5 ; ff. 
curssed, 68, 10; cursed, 12 1, 12; 
corsed, 61, 12, 

cursur, sb,, Lat. cursor, infl. by OF, 
coursier; courser, run7ier\ Cursur 
o Werld, translating cursor mundi, 

curt, court, sb.,OY, curt ; court, 7, 32. 
curteis, adj,, NF. cuiteis, OF. curtois ; 

courteous, 42, 22. 

ourteisye, curteysye, curteysy, sb,, 
NF. curteisie ; OF. curtoisie ; 
courtesy, 97, 26; corteysye, 219, 2 ; 
curteisye, 241, 10; kurteisie, 199, 30. 
cusen, see cliese(n). 

C’asse(ii), wkv,, Stb. -^Ml, kisse(n) : 
OE. cyssan; kiss', ft, sg, custe, 
196, 21, 

custome, costome, sb,, OF. custume; 

custom, 89, 5; costome, 122, i. 
cut, sb,, Celtic origin, cf. Cymr. cwta 
* short’; cut, lot, 242, 30, 
cu]?, adj,, OE. cvSS ; known, 41, 10. 
ouj70(n), wkv,, Sth. = Ml. kI 0 e(n) ; 
OE. cy^Jan; make known 5 ff. icud, 
198, 8. 

cuiSlfcliunge, ItuISlfcliunge, sb., 
Sth. — Ml. cu 2 yiechinge ; OE. *cu8'- 
l^ung,/. ; cf. cutJlsecan ; acquain- 
tance, 199,6. 

cutted,/^?. as adj, f I,, slashed, 120, 23. 
cwfad, see QLufd. 

owenaLe(3a), wl^., OE. cweman ; f lease ; 
inf cwemen, 179, 6 ; ff, cwemmd, 
( 0 ), 12 , I. 

cwene, QweiS, see queue, cw§))e(n). 
cwike, see quik. 


oyrceisird, see chirolie^frd. 
eyte, see cite. 


D. 

deede, dsei (daeis), see dede, dai. 
dsBiliiit, sb., OE. *dsegleoht (liht); 
daylight, 187, 21. 

dsel, dSre, dSp, see dfl, dere, df p. 
daft, adj., OE. (ge)d0eft; mild, stupid, 
49, 23. See deft. 

daggere, sb., ON. daggar^Jr; dagger, 
244, 2. 

dagheu, dawen, sb., OE. dajung ?, 
*da5en ; dawn, 213, 24. 
da3, da^^ess, da5eu, see dai. 
dai, sb., OE. dseg-dagas ; day, dawn ; 
(eME. d£ei, i, 14; dei, i, 14); 
da55 (O), 11,9 ; dai, 15, 2 ; day, 37, 
II ; gs. (eME. dseies, 3, 3 ; dseis, 3, 
26); ds, (WMl. dawe, 119, 10) ; fl, 
da53ess (O), 12, 10; daiges, 33, 
29. Nth. ds, in expression bryng 
of daw; kill, 170, 14. eSth. dei, 
178, 20 j ds, deie, 193, 5 ; dfl, 
da5en, 188, 9 ; fl. dawes, 200, 3. 
deis dei, day's dawn, 192, 15. Kt, 

dSl,^^i 5 -rwtt°=Ml. dgle; OE. dal, 
neut., divisio 7 i, fart, 222, 10. 
dale, sb,, OE. doel, neut., Dan. dal, 
m.f.\ dale, 57, 23. Sth. (SEMI.) 
dfle, 14, 3. 

Dalreudine, sb., JDalreudine ; fl. 
222, 9. 

dama^e(n), wkv., OF. sb, damage; 

damage ; ff. damaged, 72, 8. 
dame, sb., OF. dame ; dasne, 82,2. 
damezele, sb., OF. damisele ; damsel, 
216, 29. 

dammage, sb., OF. damage; damage, 
loss, 95, 24. 

dampnable, adj., OF. damnable ; 

damnable, condemnalde, 237, 16, 
dampnaoion, sb., OF. damnation ; 

damnation, conde 7 tmaiion, 238, 18. 
dampue(u), wkv., OF. damner; con- 
demn, damn ; ff. dampned, 92, 5. 
Dane, sb., OF. Dane; Lane', fl, 
Danes, 222, 27. 



352 


GLOSSARY 


dar, see durro(n), 

dare, whj,^ OAng. “‘'daran ?, cf. Du. 
Fris. (be)daren,* lie co7icealedj 

be disconsolate \ inf. dare, 157, 19 ; 
pr. ppl dareand, 158, 23. 

Baris, sb., OF. Daris; DaHs, 47, ii. 
dauncej sb.i OF, dance, danse ; dance^ 
159, 18. 

daiince(n), wkv.^ OF. dancer, danser; 

dance \ py.pl* daunce, 237, ii. 
David, Davi, eME. David, sb., OF- 
David ; David, King of Scotland, 
2, 14; David, the Psalmist, gs. 
without ending, 72, 5. Wth. Davl, 
I- 

Davy,jA, OF. David; Davy, Adam, 
232, I. 

daw(e), dawes, see dai. 
<iawnsyiige,/r.///. as sb., daiince(n); 

dancing, 120, 21. 
day, see dai. 

dayiie(n), wkv., OF. deigner; deign', 
pt.pl. daynede, 219, 30. 
dfad, deai, dfa^, see dfd, dai, df]?. 
debate, sb., OF. debat ; strife, debate, 


debruse(n), wkv., OF. debruisier; 
bruise, breakin pieces', pp. debnised, 
20S, 28. 

deoiple, see disciple, , . 

declar0(H.), wkv., OF, declarer ; de- 
clare ; pr. ppl. declaxyng, 223, 12. 
decoUacidun, .rA, AN. decollaciun; 

beheading, 228, 21. 
d§d, ac(i., OE. dead; dead, i, x8; 
dfad, 33, 15; dedd, 112, 17 ; dg^d, 
240, 14, Nth. dgde, 138, 22. 
dfd, dfde, see df]?. 
dedb6te, VA, OM. dedbot, WS. daed- 
hotjf.; atonement, restitution, 196, 


7 - 

dfde, dede, see dfp, do(n). 
dede, sb., OM. ded, WS. dad, f.', 
deed', d^de, 4, 7; dede, 8, 33. 
Urtli. pi. dedis, 127, 23; dedys, 

146, 24. 

dfdly, adj., OE. deadlic; deadly, 

147. 22. 

dSden, deden, see d6(3i). 
d§§d, df fl, see dfd, dfl. , 
deere, see dere. 


dees, sb. pi., OF. de, ‘ die for play ’ ; 

dice, 237, II. 
dgftb, see df p. 

dff, adj., OE. deaf; deaf, 51, 26. 
dff, see duve(n). 

defaile(n), whi)., OF. defaillir; 
grow feeble, enfeeble, weaken', inf. 
defailen, loi, i. 

defSaae(n), wku., OF. defamer ; de- 
fame : mb. br. 3 sg. defames, J47, 


defawfce, defaute, sb., OF., defante; 
default, lack, 1 1 9, 1 5. Ntb. defaut, 
150, 12. 

defel, defies, see devel. 
defend(en), wkv., OF. defendre; 
defend, forbid', inf. defenden, 104, 
10; defend, 104, 12; pp. deffended, 
238, 28. 

defens, sb., OF. defense; defence, 
protection, 103, 23. 
deffended, see defend (en). 
defdTile(n), wkv., OF. defouler; 
tread under foot, defoul', inf. de- 
foule, 104, 8. 

deft, adj., OE. (ge)d0efte (dfft?); 

mild, gentle, later skilful, deft, 1 4, 1 9 . 
degre, sb,, OF. degre; degree, rank, 
condition ; by thy degre, according 
to thy condition, 120, 32. 
deb, dei, see duge(n), dai. 
deie(ii), wkv., ON. deyja; die; inf. 
deie, 43, 8 ; deye, 118, 12 ; dye, 65, 
13; pr. pi. dyen, 68, 29; pt. sg. 
deide, 77, 5 ; dyed, 6 C, 30. Nth. 
inf. dey, 152, 16; dy, 137, 21; 
pt. sg. deyed, 154, 25. 
deies, adv., Stb. = Ml. daies ; by day, 
203, 12. 

daill, del, see dfle(n), devel. 
dfl, sb., OE. d^l ; deal, part, 47, 13 ; 
(eME. dal, 326, 5) ; never a dggl, 
not at all, 239, 8 ; deyl, 89, 8. 
dfle, see dale. 

dfle(n), wliv., OE. d^lan ; divide, 
share, deal ; pp. dfled. imb. inf. 
deill, 166, 13. Stb. pp. idfld, 39, 6- 
delite, sb., OF. debt; delight, 144, 29. 
delit8(n), wkv.,OE. deliter; delight ; 
inf. deliten, 102, 2X. ISTtb. pr. pi. 
delytes, 144, 31. 



GLOSSARY 353 


delivere(n), Sth. delivrie(n), w/^., 
OF. delivrer; delivery 2*?^ delivei, 
104, 9 ; hnp. s^. deliver, 102, 18 ; 
pt, sg. deliverd, 103, 25. Kt. inf. 
delivrl, 211, 23, 

delve(n), stv.^ OE. delfan-dcalf (3) ; 

delve, dig, bury-, inf. delven, 34, 5 ; 

• pp. dolven, 15, i. 
delyte(n), see delite(n). 
delyverly, adv., OF. delivre + ME. 

ly; promptly, 172, 26. 
deme, OE. judge \ eSth. 

ds. demen, 179, 7. 

deme(n), whv., OE. deman; judge, 
deem\ inf. demenn (O), ii, ii; 
demen, 58, 6; deme, 49, 29; pr. 

3 sg. dem?y, 179, 30; pp. dempt, 

21, 2. lartli. inf. dem, 150, 28 ; 
pt. pi. dempt, 132, 8; pp.' demid, 
137, 9. Sth.pp. idemd, 179, 17; 
idemet, 193, 31- 

demere, sb., NF. demere, OF. de- 
moere, demeure ; delay, 40, 17. 
dempt, dempt, see deme(n.). 
den, sb., OE. denn ; den, 14, 7. 
Denemark, Sth. Denemarch, sb., 
OE. Denemarc, -mearc, f. modified 
by ON. -mark; Denmark, 75, 2. 
Sth. Denemarch, 203, 19. 
denne(n), wkv., OE. *dennian ; be 
sheltered as in a den, lodge ; pt.. sg. 
dennede, 14, 18. 
deofel, deovel, see devel. 
deor, deore(n), see der. 
deorewni^e, see dSrworpe. 
deorliche, adv., OE. deorllce ; in 
costly manner, 196, 30. 
deorling, sb., OE. deoiling ; darling, 
beloved, 1S6, 26. 
deovlen, deovles, see devel. 
dep, adj., OE. deop ; deep, 53, 9. 
depaxte(n), who., OF. despartir, de- 
partir; depart, separate, divide \ pr. 

3 sg. departe]), 104, 29; pt. sg. 
departede, 222, 7. Nth. pr. pi. 
departis, 146, 18. 

der, sb., OE. deor, neut . ; animal, 
deer; pi. der, 2, 4. eSth. ds. 
deore, 180, 23; pi. deor, 193, 21; 
deoren, 182, 14. 

deie, d§r, adj., OE. deore; deay^ 

A a 


beloved, costly, 2^, 23 ; (eME. d^re, 
3, 27); der, 21, 20. 

dere, adv., OE. deore ; hardly, 
severely, 54, 19; deere, 238, 20, 
Sth. dSre, q.v. Kt. dyere, 217, 
29. 

dfre, sb., OM. *dere; cf. OE. dam; 

injury, harm, 157, 20, 
dfre(n), wko., OE. derian; injure, 
harfn, destroy ; inf. dfren, 17, iS; 
dgre, 82,18; pr. sbj. sg. dfre, 35, 2. 
Nth./. 3 sg. ders, 149, 30. 
dereyni8(n), dereyni, wkv., Sth. 
— Ml. dereine(n) ; OF. derainier ; 
defend onds catise, vindicate one's 
clahn ; inf. dereyni, 206, 8. 

derf, OE. gedeorf; trouble, affliction, 
T95, 2. 

derf, adj., OM. *deorf?, cf. gedeorf- 
nes; perh. ON. diarfr; painfid, 
grievous; comp, dervre, 194, 18. 
derfe, adv., OE. *deorf, adj., cf. 
gedeorfnys; hardly, severely, 149, 
30 - 

derfliehe, adv., OE, *deorflIce {see 
derf) ; harshly, cruelly, a 91, 26. 
derk, ae^'., OE. deore; dark, gloomy, 
49 » 7 - 

derknes, sb., based on OE. deore, 
adj. ; darkness, 103, 29, 
derne, adj., OM. deme, derne, WS. 

dierne ; secret, 14, 17 ; dern, 16, 14. 
derneHche, adv., OM. derne (deme), 
WS. dierne + ME. llche; secretly, 
202, 8. 

ders, see dfre(n), 

derSe, sb., OM. *der?y, ON. f. 

[deore]; dearth, scarcity, 27, 13. 
dervre, see derf. 

derworjae, derwor]), adv., OE. deor- 
wnr? 5 e; precious, dear, 229, 19; 
derworj), 229, 2. ©Sth. deore 
wur^e, 1 91, 17. 

desaly, adv., OE. dysig + ME. ly; 
dizzily, 172, 30. 

desavauntage, sb.. OF. desavantage; 

disadvanlage, 225, 5. 
deshonure(n), wkv., OF. deshonurer; 

dishonor; inf. deshonur, 42, 17. 
desire, sh., OF. desler, infl. by 
desirier, vh. ; desire, 104, 20. 



354 


GLOSSARY 


despise(iL), despyse(n), wkv.^ OF. 
despiser ; despise ; inf, dcspisen, 
102, 23; despise, 121, 13- Nth,. 
pr, 3 sg, dispyses, 145, 27. 
despite, see dispite. 
destanye, OF. destinee; destiny, 

dester, sh., OF. destre; right hand, 
48, 24. 

destroye(n), see destniye(n}. ^ 
destraccion, sb,^ OF. destrucion ; 
destruction, 233, 4. 

destruye(ii), tjekv,, 01<. destruire; 
destroy, disturb ; mf. dcstriiye, 2^20, 
20; pt. sg. destruyde, 223, 31 ; /> 
destruyd, 223, 13; destroyed, 223, 

destOTbe(ii). wkv,, OF., destourber; 
disturb'; pp. disturbed, 103, 0. 
ITth. imp, pi. desturbe^ 139, I 5 - 
deb, tee do(n). 

dek sb., OE. dea?y; death, 19, 30; 
TeME. dSJ), II, 8; dK» (O), il, 
26); d|a«, 27, 8; d|th, 57, 38; 
deeth, 239, 13; ”>9: 

d||e, 42, 23 ; d|de, 15, 3 - 
d|d, 128. 7; d|d9, ^SS, 275 Io- 
dides, 158, 10. StE. ds. djSe, 185, 
8 (eSth. d|aSe, 191, 26). Kt. 
ds. dlafe, 214, 14; ^ 79 ’ ^ 7 ! 

dja]), 213, 7; i> 7 . dyeajjes, 210, 21. 
deu, sb., OE. deaw; dew,x^ o._ 
devel, devel, divel, sb., OE. deofol; 
devil; (eME. defell (O), 12, 14); 
devel, 20, 13; divel, 14, 17 j del, 
12^, 37; pi (eME* deovles, 3, i, 
defiess ( 0 ), II, 27); develen?, 60, 
4. Nth. devil, 136, 5; devell, 
167, 3 ; pi. devells, 144, 12. eSth. 
pi deofles, I79» S; dpi deovlen, 
193, 30. 'ZX.pl dyevlen, 217, 35. 
clevisye(ii), wkv., OF. devisier; cm- 
trive, devise; inf. devisy, 317? ^ 3 * 
devpcyone, sb., OF. devocion, AN. 

devociun; devotion, 124, 3 * 
deye(n), deyl, see deie(n), dfl. 
diadliche, adj., jKt. = Ml. dgdeli ; 

OE. deadlic; deadly, 21 1, 21. 
Diane, sb., Lat. Diana; Diana, 193, 
20. 

diape, see df]j. 


diche, sb. OE. die, /. ; ditch ; as. 

diche, 177, 17- , 
dicht, see di5te(n). 
did, dide(n),j 5 ^ d 6 (n). 
die'S(e), see df]). 

diiteCn), wkv., OE. dibtan ; prepare, 
set in order; inf dijten, 105, 10 ; 
dyght, no, 19 ; pf digbt, i59» 33 ; 
dygbt, no, 21 ; diebt, 171,0* Sth, 
pp. idihte, 191, 3 * , ^ 

digne, adj., OF. digne; worthy, 116, 
16 ; dygne, 93, 10. _ 

dignitee, sb., OF. dignite; dignity, 

ON. diki, cogn. with OE. 
die; dike, 56, S. 

dille(n), wko)., OE. *dyllen; render 
useless. Nth. inf. dill, 132, 24. 

dim, adj., OE. dimm; dim, 20, 26; 
pi dimme, 15, 15- 

din, sb., OE. dyne, dyn; dm, noise, 
148, 9. 

dinge(n), stv., OE. *dingan-dang 
(3); beat, strike, ding; pt. pi 
dongen, 61, 21. 

dint, sb., OE. dyntj dint, stroke, Oi, 

disciple, deciple, sb., OF. disciple; 

disciile, 139, 29; deciple, 210, 22. 
discipline, sb., OF. discmlme ; disci- 
pline, correction, 

disclaundre(n), wkv., based on OF. 
disclaimder, J< 5 .; slander, disgrace; 
pp. disclaundred, 234, 14. 
discord, sb., OF. diseorde; discord, 
quarrelling, 219, 6. 
discret, adj., OF. discret; discreet, 
234, 24. 

disfse, sb., OF. disaise ; disease, 
trouble, 236, 26. 

dishonour, ob., OF. desbonur ; dis- 
honor, wrong, 239, 29. 
dispite, sb., OF. despit; scorft, de- 
spite, 137, 37. 

displfsance, sb., OF. desplesance ; 

displeasure, 146, 30. 
displfse(n), wkv., OF. displaisir; 
displease; pr. ppl. displfsyng, 233 > 
29. 

disprove (n), wkv., OF. desprover; 
disprove; pp. disproved, 234, 19. 



GLOSSARY 


355 


<iispyse(n), see despise (n). 
dist, see d6(n). 

dite(n), OF, diter, dieter; z/2- 
dzie; inf. dite, 70^ 2. 
divel, see devel, 

<1176(11), wkv,^ OE. dyven; dive\ fr. 

3 sg. dive-tS, 20, II. 
divers, dyvers, adj.^ OF. divers; 
divers, different^ 213, 31; dyver^ 
225, 12. 

d6and(e), see d6(n). 

doctour, sb,, OF. doctour; doctor, 

145, 21. 

doghter, doghtres, see dohtex. 
doghty, adj., OE. (iylitig, infl. by un- 
rautated forms; doughty ^ 116, 5. 
dohter, sb., OE. debtor ; daughter, 
5, 30; dowter, 24, 19; doghter, 
^31} 9 ; pL douhtres, 75, 12 ; dou- 
tres, 87, 2 ; doghtres, 238, 4; douj- 
tres, 220, 14. 

dgle, sb,, OE. dal; j^ortioUi dole^ 201, 
22. 

dole, sh., OF. doel (duel) ; grief, 
mourning, 159, 32. 
d6l0(n), wlioj., OF. doler, duiller; 

grieve*, pr. 3 sg, dole]?, 70, 32. 
dolven, see delve (n). 

dom, sb., OE. d5m ; judgement, 
decree, authority, doom, death, 9, 
24; 43, 30; dome, 1 21, 2. Sth. 
ds. dome, 1 77, 24. 

domesday, Sth. domesdei, sb., OE. 
ddm + daeg; doomsday, 50, 16. Sth. 
domesdei, 180, 14. 

domesman, sb,, OE, dom + man ; 
judge, 135, 7. 

don, see diin, 

d6(n), anv., OE. don-dyde (dade) ; 
do; inf, don, 8, 18; do, 43, 23; 
done, 226, 15 ; jr. 2 sg, dost, 46, 32 ; 
pr. 3 sg, do«, 18, 4; doth, 53, 18; 
dooth, 238, 15 ; pr, pi. doon, 237, 
13; imp. sg, do, 30, 13; imp. pi. 
do>, 68, 32 ; doo]), 232, 5 ; pr, ppl. 
doand, 104, 21 ; pi. sg. dide, i, 9 ; 
did, 51, 18; dede, 18, 29 ; pt. 2 sg. 

, didest, 50, 9; dist, 50, 22 ; pt.pl. 
diden, 2, 28; deden, 23, 4; deden. 
26, 19; dede, 68, 18; pp. don, 8, 
18 ; donig, 109, I. ISrth. pr„ 3 sg. 


dos, 128, 20 ; duse, 147, 17 ; pr.ppl. 
doande, 144, 3. Sth. ger, donne, 
196, 12 ; 3 sg. dej), 176, 21 ; pr. 

pi. do]), 1 78, 2; imp. pi. don, 176, 
23 ; pr. sbj. sg. do, 177, 16 ; pt. sg. 
dude, 176, 2 ; pt. pl. diiden, 179, 7; 
dude, 207, 31 ; pp. idon, 64, 7 ; idone, 
123, 9; ydon, 176, 7; ido, 179, 28; 
ydo, 204, 3. ' 

Donde, sb., Celtic dun ^ hill ’ + dee 
^ river name ’ ; Dundee, 159, 18. 
dong, sb., cf. MDu. dunge; dung, 
219, II. 

don^e = dungon, sb., OF. dongon 
-jon; dungeon, 63, 23. 
dongen, see dinge(n). 
donward, see dunward. 

dor, dorstest, see diirre(n). 

dos, dop, see d6(n'). 

Douglas, sb., Douglas, James of, 174, 
29* 

dou3ter, douhter, see dohter. 
doj^te, see duge(n). 
doumb, see dumb, 
doun, see dun. 

doiine, earlier dune, OE. dun,/.; 
hill, down, 57, 23; dune, 1S2, 13. 
_^th.//. dunen, 187, 5. 
doute, dout, sb., OF. doute ; doubt, 
fjfs'i 63? II* 3Srth. dout, 160, 28. 
doutefui, adj., OF. doute + ME. ful; 
doubtful, 220, 14. 

d6utel§§s, adj., OF. doute + ME. l|s; 
doubtless, 238, 10. 

doute (n), wkv., OF. douter; doubt, 
inf douten, joi, 5; pt. sg. 
doutede, 86, 24; pt. pi. douted, 
160, 6. Cf. dute(n), 
doutres, see dohter. 
down, dowter, see dun, dohter. 
doynge, sb., based on do(n) ; doing, 
act, 235, 6. 
draf, see drive(n). 
drage(n), drawe(n), siv., OE. 
dragan-^rog (6) ; drag, draw ; iztf 
dragen, 31, 26; pr. 3 sg. dr^etJ, 
14, 3 ; pr. pi. dragen, 20, 4 ; drawe, 
224, 7 ; pr. 'sbj* sg. drawe, 203, 
4; pt. sg. dro5, 43, 13; drouj, 
57, 28 ; drou, 86, 21 ; droh, 1 93, 
4i pl* pi* drowen, 62, 10; pp. 


2 



356 


GLOSSARY 


drawen, 234, 17, Wtli. J>r. 3 s^, 
draws, 127, 10; drawes, 127, 27; 
drawis, 171, 25. 
drank, see drinke(n). 
drapen, see drfpe(n). 
draujt, sb., OE. *draht?; draught, 
pill, tendency, 50, 23. 
draune, drawe(n), draws, see 
drage(n). 

dreoclie(n), wkv., OE. dreccan ; vex, 
torture, delay ; pr, 3 sg. drecche??, 
16, 20. 

drede, drfd(e), sb., OM. *dred,/ ?, 
WS. *dr«d; dread, 36, 5. Sth. 
drfde, 197, 22 ; it isng drfde, there 
is no doubt, without doubt, 23S, 25. 
drede(ii), stv,, OM. dredan (WS. 
dr^an)-dred (R) ; di'ead,^ foar\ 
pr, pL dreden, 104, 28 ; imp. pi 
dredety, 30, 23 ; pt. sg. dredde, 53, 
25; dradde, 234, 5. Kth. inf. 
died, 150, 29; pr. ppl. dredand, 
142, 29 ; pt. sg. dred, 141, 17* Sth. 
pr. 3 sg. dret « dredetJ, 211, 6 ; pr. 
pi. drede}), 218, 15. 
dredli, adj., cf. OM. dredan, WS. 

dredan; dreadful, fearful, 48, 8. 
drege(n), <ire3e(n), drehe(n), drl- 
3e(n), dreye(n), stv., WS. dreogan- 
dreag (2) ; ettdure, carry through, 
cucomplish j inf. driven, 182, 26 ; 
pr. pi. drege we, 26, i^fpp. drogen, 
32, 18. Nth, inf drey, 171, 31. 
Sth. inf. drehe, 194, 18. 
dreiixche(n), see drench©(ii). 
drfm, sb., OE. dream, infl. in meaning 
by ON. draumr?; dream, 21, 13; 
drfme, 91, 32 ; gpl. drfmes, 23, 16. 
Nth.//, drfmys, 145, 17. 
drenie(n), wJiO}., OM. dreman (WS. 
drieman), infi. in meaning by ON, 
dreyma?; dreamy inf dremen, 22, 
3 ,* pt. sg. drempte, 21,13. 
drench, sb., OE. drenc; drink, potion ; 

pi. drencheu, 190, 29. 
drenche (n) , ^einche (n) , wkv., OE. 
drencan; drench, drown \ inf 
dreinchen, 82, 5 5 pp, drenched, 
80, 27. 

i3rfpe(n), eME. drepe(ii), stv., OE. 
drepan-drsep (5); kill, destroy, pr. 


3 sg. drfpe?y, 20, 12; pr. shj. sg.; 
drfpe, 80, 13; pt.pl. drapen, 3, 10. 
dreri, adf, OE. dreorig; dreary, 
sorrowful, 133? 4* 

dresee(n), wkv., OF. dresser; make 
straight, direct, prepare, dress \ imp. 
sg. dresce, 103, 19. 
drey, see dr ege(n). 
drie, dri, adj., OE. dryge ; dry, 103, 
5. Nth. dri, 142, 8. 
drif(e), see drxve(n). 
dri5e(n), see dreg8(n). 

Drihte(n), Drylitin, sb., OE. Drih- 
tin ; Lord, 4, 30 ; Drihhtln (O), 8, 
20; Drigten, 15, i; Drigtin, 16, 
28. Nth. Drightin, 132, i. Sth. 
Drihte, 178, 24. 

drino, drink, drynk, sb., OE. drinc ; 

driitking, 21, 16; drynk, 101, S. 
drink© (n), stv., OE. drincan-dranc 
(3); dri 7 ik\ inf. drinken, 17, 10; 
drinke, 60, 19 ; pr. 3 sg. drinke??, 
17, 12; pt. sg. drank, 52, 28; pp. 
2.^ adj., drunken, 10 1, 9. Sth. pp. 
idrunke, 180, 22 ; ydronke, 223, 22. 
dritcherl, sb., ON. dritr + OE. ceorl ; 
dirty churl (term of contempt), 
85, 30- 

drive (n), stv., OE. drifan-draf (1) ; 
drive ; pr. 3 sg. drive®, 14, 7 ; tmp. 
pi. drive 5e, 203, 5 ; pt. sg. (eME. 
draf, 196, 33) drpf, 87, 10 ; drpfe, 
90, 6; pp. driven, 25, 5; dryven, 
238, 25. Nth. inf. drife, 155, 15; 
drif; follow, 168, 12. Sth. pr. 3 
sg, dryf}), 339, 23; pr. pL drive]), 
219, 24; pp. ydryve, 220, 8, 
dronke, pp. as adj., OE. dnincen; 
drunk, 2x9, 10. 

dronkelf 0, sb., OE. drunken + ME. 
Ifc, possibly OE. *l£ec < lac ; 
drunkenness, 120, it. 
dronkeZewe, adj., OE. druncen + 
ME. lewe<ON. legr?; drunken, 
238* 13. 

dronkenesse, sb., OE. drunceness,/.; 

drunkenness, 238, 2. 
drppe, sb,, OE. dropa; drop, 63, 25. 
drou, drou^, see dr§.g©(n), 
droup©(n),tt)y^., ON. driipa; droop; 
pr, I sg. droupe, 157, 19. 



GLOSSARY 


357 


droupening, pp. as ME. drupnen 
<ON. drupna; drooping, dejeciio7z, 

47. 26. 

drovi, adj., extended from OE. drof j 
tttz'bid, troubled i 19, 25. 
drowen, see drage(n). 
drugte, sb., OE. drugatJjj^; drought, 

23, II- 

drunken, see drinke(n). 
drynke, see drinke(n). 
dryve(n), see drive (n). 
dubbe(n), 'vokv,, OE. dubbian < OF. 
adubcr ; dizb^ adoz^i ; //.^^.diibbede, 
46, 16. 

dubbyng, sb., based on diibbe(n) ; 
dubbing^ that is creating of a hiight, 
229, 27. 

duble, sh,, OF. duble ; double, 200, x. 
dubonfre, adj., OF. de bon aire ; 

gentle, meek, 95, 28. 
due, sh., OF. due ; duke, 43, 27. 

Stb, ds. duk, 222, 3. 

Ducb.0, adj., OF. Duche < MDu 
Dutsch; Dutch, 162, id. 
diide, see d6(n). 

duelle, duelling, see dweUG(n). 
dugc(n), du5e(n),/^?'&., OE. dugan 
-dohtej avail’, pr. sg. deh, 197, i; 
pt. sg. douhte, 86, 19. 
du 3 c 1 $o, duhe’Se, sb.^ OE. dugu?S,y.; 
7iobility, body of attenda^its, people, 
dignity, honor, 181, 7; duhetJe, 
192, 5 - 

duke, see duo. 

dumb (doumb), adj., OE. dumb; 

dti7nh, 49, 23; doumb, 81, 18. 
dun, doun (down), don, adv., OE. 
d^< OIr. dun, ‘bill ’ ; down, 6, 29; 
doun, 52, 17 ; down, 90, 3 ; ddwne, 
123, 10 ; don, 128^13. 
dune, dunen, see doune. 
dunt, sb., Stb, — Ml. dint (dent) ; OE. 

dynt ; blow, stroke, dmt, 20S, 14. 
dunward, donward, adv., OE. 
adimweard; downward', donward, 
208, 7, 

dure, sb., OE. dum; door, 180, 2. 
dure, see durro(n), 
dfrre, ach., Sth. ^Ml. dere; IWS. 
dyre, OM. dere; dearly, with great 
price, 180, 24. 


durne, adv., Stb.a=Ml. dgrne; WS. 
dieme, dyrne (dyme) j secretly, 
178, 22. 

durre(n),///m, OE. durran-dorste ; 
dare; pr. sg. dar, 53, 18; pr. pi. 
duren, 27, 15 ; pr. sbj. sg. dure, 18, 
8; durre, 109, 23; dor, 235, 30; 
pt, sg. durste, 2, 3; dorst, 53, 24; 
pi. 2 sg. dorstest, 217, 31. 
duse, see d6(n). 

dust, dust, sb., OE. dust, dust; dusst 

(0) . 14, 5 - 

dute(n), wkfv., OF. dutir, douter; 
fear, doubt ; pr. 3 sg. dute]), 40, 32 ; 
wjp. pi. dute 5e, 38, 18. Cf. 
d6ute(n). 

diivelunge, adv., Sth. =* Ml. de- 
velunge; based on WS. dievan, 
IWS. dyvan, OM. devan ; headlong, 
with a plunge, 196, 26. 
duve(n), stv., OE. dufan-d|af (2) ; 

dive, smk \ pt. sg. dff, 196, 26. 
dwelle(n), wkv., OE. dwellan ; 
hinder, delay, dwell; inf. dwelle, 
59, 23; duelle, 153, 13; pr.ppl. 
dwellynge, 117, 12 ; pt. sg. dwellyd, 
no, 29. ITtb. htf. duelle, 153, 13; 
pt. sg. dweld, 138, 31. 
dwelling, sb., based on dwelle(n) ; 
dwelling, 161, 10. 

dwme(n), stv., OE. dwinan-dw^i 

(1) ; vanish, perish ; INTtb. inf. 
dwin, 148, 9. 

dyaj), dyeajj, see dfj?. 
dyche, sb., OE. dic,f.; ditch, 119, 8. 
dyeadlieb, dyadliob, adj., OE. 
deadllc; deadly, 216, 19; dyad- 
lycb, 217, 15. 
dyed, dyeap, see dfd. 
dye(n), djFere, see deie(n), dere. 
dyevlen, see devel. 
dyght(en) , see di5te(n). 
dygne, see digne. 

dyshonour, sb., OF. deshonur; dis- 
honor ; dyshondure, 1 14, 8. 
dyssayve(n), wkv., OF. decevoir; 

deceive; hif. dyssayve, 145, 15. 
dyssb, sb., OE. disc ; dish, 96, 24. 
dystresse, sb., OF. destrece, destresse; 

distress, 107, 2. 
dyvers, see divers. 



GLOSSARY 


358 

d yv yn ynge, s 5 ., based on devine(n) ; 
divining^ dimnation ; //. dyvyn- 
ynges, I 45 » . . 

dyrysidn, sb,^ OF. division ; division^ 
23^, 4 * 

E. 

e, see 030, pe. 
eal, see al. 

falohes, fald, seS fob, aid. 
faren, see §re. 

laming©, sb,, OE. earnung, ; 

Merif, earning, 178,8.^ 

Ebrisse, adj., OE. Ebreisc, Lat. 

Hebrsens + OE. -isc; Hebrew, 25, 
_ 36. 

jSbroEL, sb,, Lat. Hebron; Hebron, 
33j 8. 

ec, eke, Sth. fc, fcb, adv„ OML._ec, 
WS. eac; also, eke, 12, 27; eke, 
193, 33 - fc. 5 fc**. 

17®. 3 ; ?*«. * 97 . 2 *. 
fob, Sob, indef. fron„ OE. aslc < 
aghwylc; each', ^Ic, 4, 24; fch, 
39, 16; ich, loi, 12; Sch, 226, 
14; eucb, 192, 15. Stb. (eStb. 
flc, 178, 9; flcb, 179, 18 ; ds. flche, 
378? TPif* flcbe, 178, 32) ; 

ds, fche, 208, 10 ; fds, Cohere, 189, 
5; gs. falches, 1 79, i. Kt. ech, 
215, 7; ds., eche, 318, 18. 
echo, adj., OE. ece ; eternal, 18, 2. 
eobe, sb., based on OE. ece, adj, ; 
eternity, 191, 22. 

fddi, fdi, adj., OE, eadig; happy, 
favorable, good, 22, 22; wk. fdie, 
192, 30. 

ede (edest), fdie, see gfCn), fddi. 
fdmddlicbe, adv,, Stb. » Ml. fd- 
modli; OE. eadnnodlice; humbly, 
graciously, 202,j6, 

Edward, OE.Eadv7ard; Edward\ 
Seint, the Confessor, 204, 3 r . 
eet, see fte(iL). 

eSfr, eflEfre, sb., OF. afair ; business, 
haste', behavior, 170, 8; effgre, 
167, 9, 

EfEtaym, j 3 .,Lat.Ephraiin; Ephraim, 
24, 23. 
efFfe, see ©ft. 


efsones, see eftsone. 
eft (seft), adv., OE. eft; afterwards, 
again', efft (0), lo, 3; ^ft, 183, 7. 
ofter, see after, 
efcerward, see afterward, 
eftsone, efsones, Kt. eftzone, adv., 
OE. eft + sona ; afterwards, eftsoon ; 
efsones, 6, 19; eftsone, 207, 27. 
Kt. eftzone, 217, 19. 

Egeas, sh., Lat. Egeas; Egeas, 135, 

8 . 

Egbert, Egbertus, sb., OE. Ecg- 
berbt; Lat. Egbertus ; Egbert, 222, 
28 ; Egbertus, 222, 25. 
e^e, ege, ei5e, eiOji^e, sh., OM. ege, 
WS. eage; eye', eie, 41, 18; eyse, 
69, 30; i5e, 36, 36; pi egen, 14, 
13; ei5en, 65, 28; eijene, 51, 25; 
eysen, 67, 14 ; eyne, 85, 28 ; yjen, 
68, 30. irtb. e, 172, 9 ; pi eghen, 
140, 25. Stb. eie, 208, 20; pi 
f5en, 178, 19; eien, 197, 15; flmen, 
195, 32. 

e55wbs§r, adv., OM. egliwer (hwSr), 
WS. agbwser; everywhere, 9, 9. 
©gben, e3bn0n, see §30. 
e^te, see agte. 

e^tetenpe, adj., OM.-sebteteofJa, WS. 

ealiteteo? 5 a ; eighteenth, 226, 22. 
e^ti, adj., OM. sehtig, WS, eahtig; 
eiglity, 103, 10. 

§gir, adj., OF. aigre, egre; eager. 


I 42 » 3 - 

fgirly, fgyrl?, adv., OF. aigre, egre 
, + ME. ly; eagerlg, 168, 31. 
Egypt©, sb., OE. Egipte, later OF. 

Egipte; Egypt, 27, 28; 131, 17. 
©bsibfe, sb., OM. ege, (WS. eage) + 
sih?y,/; eyesight, 195, 23. 

©hte, see agte. 

©hte, 013 te, adj., OM. jehta, WS. 
eahta; eight, 4, n; eijte, 67, 24; 
eyste, 222, 25, 

©i, sb,, OE. ^g ; pi segru ; egg ; pL 
eiren, 19S, 22. 

ei, ei© (ei^e, ey5e), see eni, ©5©. 

©ie, sb., OE. ege; awe, fear, 7, 29; 

seie (eME.), 2, 3 ; ey^e, 53, 29. 
eiepiirl, sb., Stb. —Ml, eipirl; OE. 
eagt^yrl; window; pi. eiepiirles, 


200, 13. 



GLOSSARY 


359 


ei5e(n), ei5te, set §^e, elite, 
ei^tetene, ey5tetene, adj,^ OM. 
sehtatene (WS. eahtatlene) ; eigh- 
teen^ 2 20, 2, 
eihte, see agte. 

eilie(n), whv., OE. eglian ; trouble, 
ail, annoy; pr. sbj. sg. eille, 203, 2. 
eilgnd, sh., OM. egland-lgnd, WS. 

igland; island, 19, 5. 
eir, eiren, eis, see heir, ei, ffini. 
eise, eyse, fse, adj., OF. aise; easy, 
55, 27; eyse, 54, 3 ; |se, 109, 29. 
eiper (eyper), aiper, aipere, adj., 
OM. egto, WS. Kghwas’Ser, ^gfSei; 
either, 37, 29; typer, 45, 5 ; ai>er, 
395 3; ai^ere, 130, 6. Sth. seij)er, 
178, 6 ; ei?yer, 178, 32. 
eke, ^e, see ee. 

eke(n), whv., OM. ecan, WS. lecaii ; 
a^, increase; inf. ekenn (O), 9, 
15 ; pp. ekedd (O), 9, 9. 
el, ele, see fvel. 
flc, floh, flche, see fch. 
eldo, sb., OM. eldo, eldo, WS. ieldo ; 

age, eld, 15, ii. Sth. 5?lde, 176, 

ir- 

elde(n), •wkv., OM. eldan, eldan, 
WS. ieldan; grow old, enfeeble'. 

pp. Hded, 1 8, 3. Cf. Kt. yealde(n). 
eldere, see gld. 

eleccion, sb., OF. eleccion, AN. 
elecciun; election, 2^2^ 2 elexion, 

1 15, 26. 

Elewsius, sb., Lat. Eleusius; Eleu-- 
sizes, 192, 7 ; Lat. as. Elewsium, 
195 ; 2 * 

elexion, see eleccion. 

elleft, adj., OE. endleofta, ellefta; 

eleventh, 1 5 2, 13. 
elleovene, see enlevene. 
elles, ellis, ellys, adv., OE. elles; 
else; elless (0), 10, 9; elles, 42, 
25; ellis, 235, 30; ellys, no, 9; 
els, 137, 22. 

elleswhfre, elleswhare, adv,, OE. 
elles + hw»r; elsewhere, 236, 30; 
elleswhare, 187, 29. 
elmesse, see almes. 
elmessegifte, sb., OE. selmesse + ME. 

gifte ; almsgiving, 34, 19. 
els, see elles. 


Ely, sh., OE. Eli ; Ely, 100, 3. Cf. 
Hely. 

f m, fme, sb., OE. earn ; zencle, archaic 
earn ; (eME. fom, 2, 20), |me, 108, 
22. eSth. 1S4, 29; ds. ^me, 
185,^. _ 

emparour, see emperour. 
empere, sb., OF. empire; empire, 
221, 13. 

emperice, emperes, sb., OF. em- 
pereris, emperice ; empress, 5, 30 ; 
emperes, 107, i. 

emperour, sb., OF. empereur, em- 
pereor ; emperor, 96, 9 ; emparour, 
126, 4; emperor, 220, 17. 
empoisonyng, sb. , based on OF. em- 
poisoner ; poisoning, 245, 30. 
empoysonere, sb., OF. empoisoneur ; 
poisoner, 246, i. 

empris 6 nement,j 3 ., OF. emprisonne- 
ment; imprisozzment; pi. emprisone- 
mentz, 233, 8. 

empris6ne(n), whv., OF. emprisoner; 

imprison ; pp. emprisoned, 233, 29. 
en, see in. 

enarmynge, pr. ppl. as sb., OF. en- 
armer ; arming, 233, 6. 
end, see and. 

ende, sb., OE. ende, ende ; end ; ende 
(0), 8, 26 ; «nde, 226, 10. 
ende If s, adv., OE. endelease ; con- 
tinually, endlessly, 153, 15. 
endelies, adj., Sth. « Ml. endelfs ; 
OE.endeleas; endless; ^^[r.endellese, 
180, 21. 

end0(n), whv., OE. endian ; ezid\ 
Nth. mf. end, 149, 19; pt.pl. endid, 
132, 31 ; ended, 245, 32.^ 
endinge, endyng, sh., OE. endung, 
f; ending, 8, 12 ; ending, 27, 5; 
endynge, 215, 13. 

endite(n), wkv., OF. enditer; indict, 
indite ; pp. endited, 234, 13. 
enemy, enmy, sb., OF. enemis; 

ezzemy, 112, 21 ; pi. enm^s, 158, 30. 
endlang, adv. prep. ON, endilang; 

alozzg, beside, 166, 18, 
fnes, adv., OE. extended ; once, 
196, 2. 

i enfermer, sb., OF. enfermier; super- 
I intendent qfinjirmetzy, 1^4, 2. 



360 


GLOSSARY 


eiifourme(n), whi.t OF. enformer; 

inform ; pp. enfourmed, 236, 20. 
engsl, sIk^ OE. engel (L. angelus), 
later displaced by OF. angel, see 
an^el ; angel \ enngell (O), 12, 
32; pL engles, 179, 5. Sth. ds. 
engle, 198^ 17; gpL englene, 196, 
24. 

Engeland (-l^nde), sb,^ OE. Engla- 
land (l§nd) ; England ; Engeland, 
83, 23; Engeland, 233, 3; Enge- 

J ide, 227, 15. ^ 

n, sb., OF, engin; sZd/l, engine, 
45» 19- 

en^ne(n), wh)., OF. engignier; 0071- 
irive, torture, e7is7iare, displease; 
inf engine, 5 1, 14* 
engle, engleno, see engel. 
Bngleland, Eng^eneloande, sh , 
eME. = Ml. Engeland (Ipnd) ; OE. 
Engl aland ; E 7 tgla 7 id, 2, 2; ds. 
Engleneloande, 226, i. Cf. Enge- 
land. 

English, Englishe, Bnglisclie, En- 
gliss, adj. and sb,, OE. Englisc; 
Br^lish ; Ennglissh (0), 8. 19 ; wk, 
Ennglisshe, 10, 20; Engliscn, 222, 
27. Sth. Engliss == English, 207, 
26. 

Englyscliman, sb,, OE. Englisc + 
man ; Englishman,, pL Englysch- 
man, 222, 26. 
eni, eny, see eani. 

enlevene, ellevene, adj , OE. end- 
leofan, elleofan ; deve 7 i ; enlevenc, 
220, 2; (eME. elleovene, 1S6, 17). 
©nmang, adv,, OE. ongemang; 
a 7 no 7 tg; enmang ]?is, meanwhile, 

^7 7- 

enmys, see enemy. 

ennelepi, adj., Kt, =» Ml. enllpi ; OE. 

^nlypig ; single, 219, 9. 

-«nngel, see engel. 

Ennglissh, see English. 

Ennok, sb,, OF. Enoch?; Enoch, 
joo, 3. 

enprise, sh., OF. emprise ; ente 7 p 7 dse, 
cleverness, 57, 17. 

ensaumple, ensample, sb., OF. en- 
sample ; excsmple, 70, 7 ; ensample, 
SB, 17 ; ensanapel, 148, 34. 


entente, entent, sb., OF. entente; 
intent, desig 7 t, purpose, 344, 21. 
Nth. entent, 130, 5. 
enter, enterit, see entre(n). 
enterlicb, adv., Sth. = Ml. eiiterli ; 
OF. entier + ME. Hch; e7ttirely, 336, 
24. 

enterynge, pr, ppl, as sh., OF. en- 
terrer; interrmg, 118, 15. 
entrede, see entre(n). 
entremfte(n), wkv., OF. entremetre; 
7mddle with, disturb; htf. entre- 
niften, 202, 1. 

entre(n), wkv., OF. entrer; e7iier; 
inf, entre, loi, 21; pt.pl. entrede, 
220, 9. Nth.//, sg. enterit, 166, 3. 
Sth.//. ientred, 213, 25. 
envie, envy, sb,, OF. envie ; e7Wy, 
54, 15; anvie, 211, 20; envy, 135, 
10. 

6ode, fom, see gg{n), |m. 

eom, eorl, see be(n), erl. 
eorne(n), stv., OM. iomaii, WS. 

iernan (yrnan)-9rn (3); run; pr. 
3 sg, eometJ, 196, %6; pt. sg. 01 n, 
182, 15. 

eoi^e, see erthe. 

eojriSetilie, sb., OE. eorfftilia ; tiller oj 
the ea7'ih, husbandinan ; Sth. pi, 
eortJtilien, 202, 10. 

eon, eovp*, see ]?u. 

Eou-werwic, Eowerwik, see Evor- 
wio. 

epple, see appel, 
er, see pper. 

f sb., OE. ear; ear (of C 07 'n) ; pc. 
fres, 23, 8. 

fr (fre), adv., OE. ; before^ ere ; 
(eME. ^r, 4, 26) ; |r, 7, 34; fre, 7, 
23 ; superl. (eME. ^resst, 13, 30) ; 
|rest, 197, iS; erst, 338, 32. 
er, ere, ert, see^'be(n). 
erand, see ernde. 

f rd, sb., OE. eard, eard ; land, cou7ziry, 
dwellmg, home, 22, 30 ; eME. ^rd, 
184, 13. 

frde(n), who., OE. eardian, fardian ; 

dwell, inhabit; inf. frde, 87, 24. 
fre, see f r. 

fre, sb., OE. eare ; ear, 51, 26; are, 
10, 32 j pi. |ren, 64, 22. eSth. pi. 



GLOSSARY 


361 


garen, 197, 21, Kt. yare, 214, 

33. 

erl, sd., OE. eorl ; ea?'I, 42, 6 ; eorl, 
5, 7 ; ^orl, 5, 23. eSth, as. eorle, 
186, 21. 

frliclie, frlich, adv., OE. serlice; 
earlj/, 57, ii ; grllch, 103, 15. 

frn, fme, s 5 .f OE. earn, earn ; 

15, 8 ; fme, 104, 20. 

ernde, erand, sd,j OM. erende, WS. 
^rende ; message, errand, petition ; 
22, 9; ermde (O), ii, 5; erand, 
70, 10. 

erndie(n), whv., Sth. = Ml.ernde(n); 

, OE. aerendian ; intercede j pr. shj. 
sg. emdl, 197, 10. 

erndungo, sb., OE. ^rendung, f . ; 

intercession, 191, 21. 
frnest, OE. earnest,/.; eaimesi- 
ness, 207, 23; 

ernynge, sh., based on OM. eornan, 
eornan; course, running, stream, 
100, 19. 

errnde, see ernde. 
erre, see be(n). 

errowre, OF. eiTour; error, 145, 
21. 

erst, see fr. 

erllie, erjje, sb., OM. et?Se, er^Je, WS. 
eatiSe; earth, 4, 6; erpe (O), 10, 
16; (eME. eort^e, 178, 19); an 
&])e, in earth, to burial, 209, 27. 
irtli. erth, 133, 38. 
ertliely, er])li5, adj., OE. eor'SlIc, 
eor^lic; earthly, ertliely, 144, 6; 
er])ll5, 12, 17. 
es, esse, see be(n), 

Esau, sh., OE. Esau (trisyllabic) ; 
Esau, 130, 26. 

esoliape(n), who., OF. eschaper, 
NF. escaper; escape; Nth. pt. sg. 
eschapit, 167, 32. 

eschaping, sb., based on eschapeCn) ; 

escaping, escape, 167, 33. 
eschewe(n), wkv., NF. eschever, pr. 
st. eschew ; eschew, shun ; inf. 
eschewe ; 120, 8. 

fse, see eise. 

fseliehe, adv., OF. aise (eise) + ME. 

llche; easily, 208, 7. 
espye, sh., OF. espie; spy, 241, 26. 


esse, see bS(n). 

fst, fste, sb., OE. east; east; fste, 
104, 29. 

estat, sb., OF. estat; estate, state, 

- ^ 34 , 3 - _ , 

igstreiL, igstre, pi. as sg., 
i|astran(on) ; Easter, 4, 30 ; Estre, 
_ 200, 3. 

^stun,.?^. ,OE. Easto 7 i (N orthampton'', 
4, 23. 

fstward, adv., OE. easlweard ; east- 
ward, 231, II. 
et, see at. 

fte(n), eME. eten, stv., OM. elan 
-et (WS. St) (5) ; eat; inf. ceten, 5, 
14; |te, 109, 2 ; pr. pi. ften, 237, 
12; pt. sg. et, 52, 28 ; ete, 67, 25. 
Sth. ger. ftene, 202, 19 ; pt. sg. gft, 
238, 38, 

etwite(n), see atwite(n). 

^emoded, adj., OE. ea? 5 mod ex- 
tended ; perh. OM. *e^e (WS, 
ietye)-m 5 ded ; humble, grcu'ious, 
27 ; 25. 

fiSlfte, adj., OE. *ea?Sl&te, cf. ear- 
foSlsete; lightly esteemed, 17S, 18. 
ftSltike, OE. ea '5 + lucan, * to 

puir?; easily pulled (?), 195, 27. 
euch, see f ch. 

Eugenie, sb., OF. Eugenie ; Pope 
Eugenius III, 4, 18. 

Enstaoe, sh., eME. Eustace, OF. 

Eustace; Eustace; eME, Eustace, 
_ 7 > I- 

Eve, sb.,"^. Eva, OE. Efe; Eve, 64, 
9 ; Eves, 71, 26. 
fvel (evyl), ©vnyl, el, adj. sh., Kt. = 
Ml. ivel (gvel ?) ; OE. yfel, Kt. efel ; 
evil; fvel, 21 1, 19; fvyl, 92, 9; 
gvil, 141, 16 ; gvuyle (WML), 120, 
2; el, 125, 28; Be, 121, 3. Cf. 
yvel. 

fven, adj., OE. efen ; even, just, 234, 
18. 

fven, evne (sefne), adv. p 7 'ep., OE. 
efen, ejEne; evenly, equally, accoid- 
ingto; eSth. sefne, 183, 16. 
even, sb. OM. efen, WS. sefen ; even- 
49; 36. 

f ver (eevre) , f vre, ever, evere, adv . , 
OE. ffifre ; ever; eME. sevre, 3, 32 ; 



362 


GLOSSARY 


ffivere, 183, il; Sfre, xo, 16; 
ever, evere, 121, 3; aver, 187, 19 ; 
severt *= |ver te (to), ifo this time, 

ever yet, 7, 24. eSth. fvre, 178, 9. 
everem99re, see evermore, 
everilc, levric, everi (every)? ©ver- 
euob, adj, pm,, OE. sefre, ^Ic; 
every, every one, 2:^, 2 ; ^vric, 2, i : 
even, 69, 24. eSth, Kvrich, 177, 
8; evereuch, 195, i; everich, 2x2, 
14. 

everlastand, pr, ppJ. as adj., OE. 

sefre + fetan; everlasting, xoi, 20. 
evermare (-mar), adv,, = 
evermore; OE. sefre maia; ever- 
more, 146, 2; evermar, 129, 16. 
everm§re, evermgr, adv.,OK ^fre + 
mara ; evermore ; evermore, 97, 24 ; 
evermgr, 30, 2 ; everemggre, 239, 
21, 

Everwik, see Evorwic. 
ev©ry(clie), see everilo. 
everywlier, every-wliere, adv,, OE. 

Sfre + Hwsr, everyvjhere, 95, ii. 
evesong, sh., OM. efensang-sgng, 
WS. afensang; evensong, vespers, 
51, 6. 

Erorvdc, ^ork, sB., OE. Eoferwic; 
Vorh, 5, 7; Euerwik, 205, 29; 
(eSth. ds, Eonwerlc, 1 88, 18 ; Eoner" 
wike, 188, 23); Bork, 225, 25. 
fvuyle, fvyl, see fvel. 
gvynly, adv., OE. efenlice; evenly, 
equally, at once, 169, 17* 
examine (n), OF. examiner; 

examine', pt* sg. examyned, iii, 

7 * 

excuse (n),a;.^., OF. escuser, exciiser; 
excise', inf. excuse, 236, 22; pp. 
excusyd, 117, 10. 

Execestre, sb., OE. Exsinceaster ; 
Exeter, 2, 12. 

exaGute(ii), vakv., OF. executer; 
execute, perfonn ; pp. execnt, 236, 
3 ®* 

exequis, sh., OF. exequis; funeral \ 
pi. exequises, 118, 20. 

Exton, sb., Extort, Nicholus, 234, 26. 
extorcyone, sb., OF. extorcion, AN. 

-tm; extortion, 147,17. 
ey5©(eyne), eyse, see e^e, eie, eise. 


©gyEt© (ey5te), eEte. 
ey^tetene, see eiljteten©. 
6yJ?0r, see eijjer. 


E. 

fa,, sb., Nth. = Ml. fg; OE. fall, fa; 
foe; INfch. fais, 168, 32; fayis, 
i 74 > 7 * 

face, sb., OF. face; face, 64, 13. 
fader, sb., OE. father, 7, 17; 
faderr (O), 13, 7; gs. fader, 69, 
23; faderes, 31, 20; fadyre, 146, 
25. Sth. feder, x8o, 28 (eSth. 
feader, 191, 16). 
fSrd, f8er50st, see ferd, fair. 
fseste(n),7e;^.,OE.f3estan; make fast, 
fasten; eME. faeston, 6, 16. 
fsDstne(n), wkv., OE. faestnian: 

fasten; pp. fsestned, 3, 1$, 
fseu, faght, see few, feght. 

3^3s(xl), fagen, feyn, ac^\, OE. 
fsegen, fsegn ; fain, glad ; fagen « 
fajen, 19, X2; faje, 44, i; fayn, 63, 
15; feyn, 95, 26; fain, 165, 2. 
faht, see fi3te(n). 

faile(n), wh)., OF. faillir ; fail ; pt. 
sg. faylyd, 112, 27; pt. pi. failedcn, 
103, 8 ; failed, 103, 5 ; failede, 222, 
30; faylede, 323, 13. Nth. /r. 3 
fades, 129, 1. Bfh. pr.pl. faile]), 
223, 6 ; pp. yfayled, 315, 23. 
faintes, sb., OF. feintise ; languor, 
weakness, cowccrdice, 105, 2.^ 

fair, feir, fayer, fare, adJ,, OE. 

fseger; fair; fayer, 75, 6; faro, 
228, 10; wk. faire, 47? 8 ; //. feire, 
39, 19; feyre, 91, ii. Sth. feir, 
192, 9; vceir (eSth.), 18 x, 10; 

vair, 206, 4 ; comp, fehere, 194, 33 ; 
superl. fser^est, 188, 19; vairest, 
190, 26. 

faire, fair, adv. fsegere ; fairly, well, 
8, II. Sth. feire, 193, 10; vaire, 
209, 26; fair, 222, II, 

fais, see fa,. 

fai]5ful, adj., NF. feiS (OF. fei) + 
ME. fill ; faithful, 154, 8. 
fal, sb., OM. *fall. WS. *feall or ON. 
fall ; fall, ruin, 58, 3, 



GLOSSARY 


363 


fal, see falle(n). 
fale, see ffle. 

falle(n),^/?:^.,OM. fallan (WS. feallan) 
-feol (R) ; fall ; happen ; pr, 3 sg, 
falle??, 15, 29; pr. pi. fallen, 15, 
27 ; falle, 46, 18 ; pr. sbj. sg. falle, 
103, 4 ; pt. sg. fel, 43, 26 ; felle, 40, 
22; fil, 243, 8; pt. pi. fellen, 28, 

16. Nth. inf. fal, 149, 31 ; pr. 
3 sg. falles, 153, 31; pt. pi. fell, 
126, II. Sth. inf. valle, 182, 2; 
pr. 3 sg. yalji, 218, 20; pt. sg. veol 
(eSth.), 182, 2; feol (eSth.), 182, 
3 : vel, 206, 4. 

falle(n), whv., OM. fellan, WS. 
fiellan (fyllan) by confnsion with 
fallen < OE. feallen ; fell, destroy, 
kill; inf. fallen, 183, 8. 
fallow, felawe, see folBe(n), faUowis. 
fallwe(n), wkv., OE. fealwian; grow 
yellow, fade*, inf. fallwen, 100, 20. 
,fals, adj., OF. fals ; false ; wk. false, 
51, 24. Sth.//. valse, 199, 19. 
falsenesse, sb., OF. fals + ME. nesse; 
falsness, 234, 8. 

falshfde, sb., OF. fals + ME. hfde; 
falsehood, 203, 23. 

falsly, adv., OF. fals + ME. ly ; 
falsely, 234, 13. 

familerlich, adv*, OF. familier + 
ME. Moh.*, familiarly, 235, 16. 
fand, see finde(n). 
fantiim, sb., OF. fantosme, fantome; 

phantom, fancy, 12 8, 5. 
fare, sb., OE. faru,/ \ journey ; eME. 
fare, 3, 26; behavior, haughtiness, 
boasting, 135, 20. 
fare, seefoAx. 

far8(n), eME. faren, siv.^ OE. faran- 
for (6) ; fare, go ; inf. (eME. faren, 
I, 10) fare, 32, 5 ; /r. 3 

17, 21; pr. sbj. sg. f^e, 16, 26; 
pt. sg. for, I, 13 ; pt. pi. foren, 35, 
4. Nth. pr. I sg. far, 155, 4. 
eSth. inf. varen, 184, 31 ; pp. 
ivaren, 181, 10; ifaren, 187, 7. 

faste, aav., OE. fasste; fast, firmly, 
21, 3; fast, 18, 21. Sth. vaste, 
205, 21. 

faste (n), wkv., OE. fsestan; fast, 
abstain from food*, inf. faste, 56, 


27; pr. 3 sg. faste?y, 17, 4; //. sg. 
fasted, 238, 26. Nth. pr. 3 sg. 
fastes, 145, 6;//. fastyt, 171, 17; 
fast, 131, 23. 

fatt,_£^*., OE. fffitt ; fat, loi, 8. 
faucoun,^^., AN. faucon; falcon*, 
pi. faucouns, 48, 25. 
fan^t, see fl5te(n). 
faurtend, see fortend. 
favour, sb., OF. favur ; favor, T47, 3. 
Favresfeld, sb., Faversham (Kent), 


7. 27. 

fay, sb.^ OF. faye ; fay, fairy, 125, 25. 

fayer (fayre), see fair. 

fayle, sh., OF. faille ; fail, failure. 


no, 4. 

fayle(n), fayn, see faile(n), fa5en. 
fayrnes, sb., OE. fsegemes, f. ; fair- 
ness, 129, 13. 

fe, sb., OE. feo < feoh; property, 
money, fee, 76, 21. 
feader, feale, see fader, ffle. 
feat (ffat ?), sb., OE. feet ; vat, vessel, 

feaw, see few. 

feblelihe, adv,, OF. feble + OE. 

lice; feebly, scarcely, 77, 21. 
feche(n), feoche(ii), fette(rL), wkv., 
OE. fetian, feccan (fettan) ; fetch, 
bring*, inf fechen,3i, ii ; fecchen, 
195, 14 ; fette, 59, 27 ; pr. pi fette, 
46, 22 ; pt.pl. fett, 113, 23 ; pp.ieX, 
62, 2. Nth. pr. 3 sg. fettes, 127, 
18. 


fede(ii), feede(n), wko., OE. fedan; 
feed*, inf fide, 84, i ; feede, 147, 5 ; 
pt. 2 sg. fedde, 48, 26 ; pp.pl. fedde,. 
53, 21. Nth.pt. sg. fedd, 132, 4. 
Sth. inf. veden, 201, 30. 
feder, feend, see fader, fend, 
feer, fegste, see fer, ffst. 
fege(n), wkv., ON. fsegja; cleanse, 
polish ; imp* sg. feg, 1 S, 20. 
fegtande, f6ghte(n), see fl5te(n). 
fehere, see fair, 
feill, see ffle. 

feinte(n), wkv., OF. pp. feint < 
feindre; faint*, inf feinte, 231, 3. 
feir, feire, see fair, faire. 
feiJS, sb., NF. feiS, feid, OF. fei; 
faith, 25,2^. Of. fey. 



364 


Gtossj/ty 


fel, fell, ad/., OE. fel ; jfzer^^, cruel ; 

pL felle, 74, 25. 
fel, fel, sea falle(n), felle(n). 
fel, felle, sk, OE. fell; skm, fell, 
17, 4; felle, 1 13, 18 ; ds. felle, 59, 
29. 

fel, felle, sk, ON. fell; mount azn^ 
MU Jell, 1 5 1, 19. 

fela-we, felaw, felau. (fela), sb., ON. 
felagi ; fellow ; felaw, 97, 20 ; pi. 
felawes, 90, 9; felas, 117# 7* 
fallow, 1 71, 9; felaus, 154, 4; 
fallowie, 170, ig. eSth. pL feo- 
lahes, 192, 7. KU pi velaghes, 
212, 20, 

feld, see fgldeCn). 

feld, felde, sb., OE. feld, feld ; field ; 
pi. feldes, 30, 28 ; felde, 113, 5. 
Sth. vHd, 1S2, 5 ; velde, 206, 8. 
feldes t, sea fele(n). 
ffle, eME. fele, adf, OE. fela, feola, 
sb., adj \ ; many', eME. fele, 10, 6 ; 
f|le,*3r, rg. eStli, feale, 178, 14; 
fale, 176, 10; fsole, 184, i ; vele, 
179, 8. 

f§le(ii), wkv., OE. felan ; feel; pr.pL 
felen, 19, 12 ; pt. sg. felde, 192, 10. 
Nth. pr. 3 sg. felis, 150, I ; pp- 
felid < felid, 154, 13, ^ 
fellcitee, j/’., OF. felicite; felicity , 
242, 24. 

felid, fele(n). 

fell, felle, fellen, falleCn), fel. 

fe!le(n), f0le(n), wliv], OAng. fellan, 
WS. fiellan; fell, cut down, take 
down; Nth. inf fell, 142, 15 ; fel, 
149, 28. 

felon, sb., OF. felon, AN. -vn, felon, 
evil-doer; pi. felons, 42, 30. 
felony, sh., OF. felonie ; felony, 78, 

15* 

felunlyche, adv.^ AN. felun + ME. 

lycbe; feloniously, evilly, 90, 2. 
f|me(n), (in), wkv., OE. fSman ; 

foam; 195, 13. 

fen, sh., OE. fen; marsh, fen, 162, 
25 - 

fen, j/ 5 ., Arabic, fan ; fen, section of 
Arabic cantm, 245, 29. 
fend, feend, fende, $h., OE. feond ; 
fiend, devil, 56, 4; fend^, 3; 


feend, 244, 16 ; pi. fendes, 59, 26. 
Sth. pL ieond (eSth.), 1S3, 8? 
veond (eStb.), 198, 14. Kt. v^end, 
219, 7- 

fenn (fen), sk, OE. feisn.;fen, marsh ; 
ds. fenne, 51, 23. 

feol, feolalie, see falle(n), felawe. 
fools, feond, see ffle, fend, 
feord, see ferd. 
feorde(n), see fere(n). 
feorrene, adv., Sth. = Ml. ferre(n); 

OE. feorrene; afar, far, 200, 5. 
feoii*ver, see fewer, 
feowertene, see fowertene. 
Eeoverel (Peoverer), sb., OF. 

Fevrier; Fehrumy, 197, 9. 
feowertene, see fowrfcene. 
fer, adv., OE. feor; far, lojzg, 33, 

13- 

fer (ffr), sb., OM. fer, WS. fair ; fear, 
59, 13. sth. ds. %re, 233, 9. 
ferd, see fere(n). 

ferd, ferde, sh., OM. ferd, WS. 
flerd,/. ; army, ^,2$; (eMK.f^rd, 
5,6; feord, 6, 28). Sth. ds. ferde, 
185,7; verde, 185, 5. 

ferde, sb., OAng. ’’'ierde?, cf. MHG. 

gev^rde ; terror, fear, 142, 30. 
ferde (n), J5^fepe(n). 

fere, sb., OE. gefera ; companion ; pi 
feres, 34, 31- Sth. yere, 199, 28. 

fere, see fir. 

fere, sb., OE. gefer, n,; company; 
in fere, together, log, 6 ; i fere, 40, 
18. 

fereden, see ferie(n). 
fere(n), wkv , OE. feran; go, follow, 
act, do ; pt. sg. feorde, i, 6 ; ferde, 
5, 24; ferde, 78, 18 ; pi pi. (eME. 
feorden, 2, 16) ferden, 29, 18. Nth. 
pt. sg. ferd, 155, 17. 
ferie(ii), wkv., OE. ferian < ON. 
feija; ferry, carry; pt. sg. fereden, 
1 82, 20. Sth. pt. pi. vereden, 
191,4. 

ferli, adj., OM. ferllc, WS. f^rlic; 

fearftU, wonderful, 15 1, 14. 
ferlich, ferly, sh., OM. ferlic, WS. 
ferllc ; terror, fear, wonder, 
miracle, 36, 8; pi flrl^s, 126, 
II, 



GLOSSARY 


365 


ferly, ferKch, OM ferlice, WS. 
f^rllce ; fearfully^ wonderfully, 90, 
8 ; ferlich, 194, 5. 

ferre, adj., OE. feorren ; far, 144, 26. 
fers, sb., OE. fers, later displaced by 
OF. vers; verse', ferrs (O), 9, 16. 
fers, adj,, OF. fiers ; fierce, 48, 16. 
ferst, see first. 

ferpe, adJ., OK feorSa; fourth, ii, 

38. 

ferthermpre, adv., ME. ferther (< 
OEc'*feor) +m.qxQ,further 7 nore, 233, 
10. 

ferpynge, forpyug, sb., OE. feorSing, 
/. ; farthhig, 94, 30; ferthynge, 
117, 24. 

fest, adf, OE. fiest ; fast, 31, 21. 
fest, sb,, Kt. — Ml. fist; OE. fyst; 
fist, 243, 6. 

ffste, ffst, sb., OF. feste; fectst, 34, 
235 %ste, 238, 7; ffst, 116, 23. 
festen, Stli. = ML faste(ii); OE. 
fsesten ; fast, abstaining from food, 
180, 25, 

feste(rL), ON. festa, OE. fasstan ; 
fastest, strengthe 7 t', hif. fesstenn (O), 
13,5; pr, pi. festen, 20, 5 ; imp. sg. 
feste, 18, 20; feste, 18, 6. Nth. 
imp.pl. festes, 138, 21; pt. pL 
festid, 140, 18 ; fest 138, 27. 
festne(n), wkv., OE. fsestnian?; 
fasten', inf fesstaenn (O), 12, 8. 
Sth. pp. ivestned, 203, 3. Cf. 
f80stne(n). 
fet, see feche(n). 

fgt, adj., OE. fset; fat, 23, 2 ; pi. 

fette, 23, 5. Cf. fatt. 
fete, fetsteppe, see f6t,fotsteppe. 
f|te(n), wkv., OK f^ttian or OM. 
*fsetan ; fatten, make fat ; inf. f|te, 
84, 22. 

feter, sb., OE. fetor, feotor; fetter', 
pi. feteres, 5, 28. 

fe^ere, OE. fe?Jer,^ ; fecdher ; pi. 

' fe?Sres, 15, 27; pi. fej»ers, 103, 27. 
fetlea, sb., OK fsetels; vessel, 194, 
26- 

fette, fette(ii), see fft, feche(ii). 
fettee, see feohe(3i). 
ff t^, adj.. OF. fetis, faitis ; shapely, 
need, skiful, 237, 22. 


few, adj., OK feaw; few, (cME. 

fseu, 5, 8). eSth. feaw, 212, 26. 
fey, sb., OF. fei, NF. feit? ; faith, 
belief', by my fey, 241, 33, Cf. 
feiS. 

feyn, feyr, see fa^en, fayer. 
feyre, sb., OF. feire; fair, market', 
pi. feyres, 120, 35. 

fif, five, fife, fifie, adj., OE. fif ; 
fve, 31, 17; five, 64, 26. Nth. 
fife, 167, II ; fiffe, 166, ii. Sth. 
vlf, 218, 17. 

fifetende, acf., OAng. fiftegSa; fif- 
teenth, 152, 21. 
fiffe, see fif. 

fifte, fyfte, adj., OE. fifta; fifth, 12, 
2 ; fyfte, 223, 29. 

fiftene, flften, adj., OM. fiftene, 
WS. fiftiene ; fifteen ; fyftene, 1 16, 
4; fiften, 151, 13. Nth. fiveten, 
133, 4- 

fi5te(n), figte(n), siv., OM. fehtan 
-fseht, WS. feohtan-feaht (3) ; fight\ 
inf. fihten, 185, 25; fijte, 54, ii ; 
pr. 3 sg. figtetS, 17, 21; pr. ppl. 
figtaiide, 17, 21 ; pt. sg\ faht, 189, 
31; faujt, 50, 25; pLpl. fuhten, 5, 
8. Nth. pr. ppl. fegtande, 144, i r ; 
pL sg. faght, 131, 2 ; pt. pi. faght, 
J26, 15. Sth. inf* vihte, 189, 12. 
fiht, sb., OE. feobt, f. ; fight, battle, 
187, '3; ds. fihte, 187, 18. 
fihte(ii), see fi5te(ii). 
flldo, see fille(n). 

fil8(n), zukv., OK fylan ; make foul, 
defile', pp. filed, 66 , 19. 

Filip, see Philip. 

fille(n), wkv.jOE. fyllaii; fill, fulfil', 
inf. fillena (O), 8, 23; pr. 3 sg. 
filletJ, 14, 4 ; pt. pi. fylden, 2, 31 ; 
pp. pi. filde, 75, 17; filled, 245, 
16; filt, 26, 21; ifild (SEMI.), 42, 
6. Nth. fillit, 171, 23. Sth, 
mf. fullen, 195, 15; pp. ifiild, 208, 
18. 

filstiie(ii), wkv., OE. *fylstuian or 
extension, of fylstan ; support, help ; 
pt. sg. filstnede, 15, 3. 
filt, see fille(rL). 

fil’Se, fyithe, sb., OE. fyl'S,/.; filth, 
18, 16; fyltbe, 144, 10. 



366 


GLOSSARY 


fijx, adj.^ OF. fin ; Jine^ 31, 1 8. 
fin, sb.^ OF. fia ; end^ 35, 21. 
Jfinde(ji)y ^nde(n), OE, fiudan 
(findan)-fand (f^nd) (3) ; fmd^ 
provide for ; inf, finden, 3, 26 ; 
findenn (O), 9, 5; fynde, 91, 9; 
fr. 3 sg, findes, 29, 32 ; pr, 3 sg, 
fIndetS, 20, 18; pt, sg. (eME. f^d, 
4, II) ; fgnd, 26, 32 ; fgnde, 90, 4; 
frmdej_^44, 13 ; pt, pi, funden, S3, 
15 ; founde, 100, i ; pp. funde, 39, 1. 

pr, pi. findes, 134, 16; pp. 
fiindun, 128, 27. TSX.pr, ^sg, viat 
= ML fiadej), 218, 8 j pi, fgnden, 
212, 9. 

fir, sb,^ OE. fyr, n. ; fire^ 17, 16 ; ds. 
fire, 44, 12. Stli./Ur, 178, 20; ds, 
fQie, 177, 19 ; pi, fur, 189, 29. Kt. 
ver, 317, 24; fere, p. 272. 
firmest, adv,,Q%. fyrmestj at firsts 
best, 18, 21. 
fijrste, see first. 

firse(n), firsi(n), wkv., OE. feorsian, 
fiersian (fyrsian) ; rerntyoe ; inf. firsin, 
194, 14. 

first, sb,, OE. first, f3^st; space of 
time, time, 53, 28. Sth. don a 
fiirst, place in. respite, ptU off, delay, 

first, adj,, OE. fyrest, fyrst ; first ; wk, 
firrste (O), 10, 5. StK furst, 220, 
I. Kt, ferst, 212, 3; verst, 203, 
17 - 

fisc, ^ fish, fis, fiss, OE. fisc; fish, 

fis'’=fish, 19, I. Kth. fiss, 132, 4; 
pl, fises, 151, 28. eSth- fisc, 182, 
30; pl, fisces, 178, 27. 
fish§re,J^.,OE. fiscere; fisher,So,^J, 
fi.te(n), 7 vkz;,, OE, fettian, *fittiaij; 

contend with, abuse, 195, 21, 
five, fiveten, see fif, fiftene. 
fi^sh, see fif sh. 
fiah, see fie(ii). 

flamme, flaumme, sb,, OF. flamme; 

fiafne, 99, 23 ; flaumme, 99, 24. 
Flanclres, Flaundres, sb., OF. 
Flandres ; JFlanders, 159, 20 ; 

Flaundres, 337, 7. 

fiatryng, sb,, based on M0u. flat- 
teren ? ; fiattering, 221,15, 
flaumme, see flamme* 


flaun, sb,, OF. flaon; pancake, 84, 
2p 

Flaundres, see Flandres. 
fie, fiedde, see fie(n). 
fiaye(n), wkv., ON. fleyja; put to 
flight, frighten, 

flege(n) = fle5e(n), flige(n), stv,, 
OM. flegan-fleh, WS. fieogan-fleah 
{2)\ fly as a bird ; pr, 3 sg, flegeS, 
15, 19; pr, pl. flie, 51, 23; pt, sg. 
fli5te, 36, 25. Nth. pr, 3 sg flyes, 
143, 26. Sth./^. 3 sg. vlys]?, 219, 

22 ; pr. ppl. vlyinde, 215, 18. 
fleh, fleis, fleisch, see fle(rL), flfsh. 
flf m, sb,, OE. fleam ; flight ; Sth. ds, 
flfme, 182, 8. 

flem, sb,, OF. flegme; slimy matter 
in tk 7 'oat, sluggishness of tempera- 
ment, 221, 8. 

fiemeCn), wkv,, OM. fleman, WS. 
flieman ; put to flight ; pt, pl. 
flemden, 5, 9. Nth. pp, fiemid, 
158, 28. 

Flemmyng, Flemyng, sb., OE. 

Fleming; Fleming, 223, 2. 
fle(n), stv., OM. fleon-fleh (WS. 
fleah) (3); flee\ mf. fle, 79, 31; 
pr. 3 sg. £e&, 17, 16; pt sg, 

5, 32 ; pt. pl. flugen, 3, 29 ; flowe, 
208, 3; wk, pt.pl, fledde, 233, 8 ; 
wk. pp, pl, fledde, 48, 28. Sth. pt, 
sg. fiah, 188, 21. 

fleos, sb,, eSth. ==M 1 . lies; OE. 

fleos ; fleece ; ds. fleose, 199, 4. 
fids, fifs, fiesche, see fifsh. 
fleschlich, adj. , OE. fl^sclic ; fleshly, 
carnal, 19 1, 24. 

flfsh, flesh, fleisch, fles, fiesse, 
flessh, sb,, OE. flesh, animal 
food; (eME.fifsc, 3, 27 ; fl^sh (O), 
12, 7); fl|s, 17, 9; fleis, 22, 25; 
fieys, 49, 13 ; fleisch, 50, 8 ; fifsche, 
113, 18; flessh, 241, 3. Nth. 
flesse, 128, 30. Kt. fles, 213, 7* 
fiete(n), stv,, OE. fleotan-fleat (2) ; 
float, swim ; pr, 3 sg, flet « fletety, 
ipj 4; sg, flete, 80, 29, 

'SL&tt,sb., OE. fiett; floor*, flette, 
122, 32. 

fieys, fli0(n), see flfsh, fiege(u). 
fii^te, see fiege(n). 



GLOSSARY 3^7 


fligt, sd,f OE. flylit ; flight, 15, 14. 
floe, sb,, OE. flocc \ flock, troop \ flocc 
(0), 9, 24. 

flod, sb,, OE. flod; nver, flood, 22, 
32 ; ds^ flode, 73,1. Stli. ds. vlode, 
182, 18. 

flod^et, sb., StE. = Ml. flodjat ; OE. 
*ilodgeat ; floodgate \ pL flodseten, 
201, 16. 
flom, see flum. 

fl9(n), sb., OE. flan ; arrow ; pL flgn, 
308, 12. 

flo(n), stv., OM. flan (\¥S. flean) 
-floh (6) ; flay, skin ; inf. flg, S3, 
25. 

Flgris, sb., OF. Floris ; Rloris, 35, 
18. 

floriselie(n), florrisse(n), wkv., OF. 
florir, floriss- ; flourish ; inf. floris- 
sen, 105, 4; pr. sbj. sg. florische, 
103, 4 - 

flgryn, sb*, OF. florin; florin, 342, 7. 
fl|te, sb., OF. flote ; flock, company, 
_87, 23^ 

flour, floure, see flur. 

floured, ppf. as adf; OF. flurir; 

flowered, ornamented, 117, 2, 
flo^e, flugen, see fle(n). 
flum, sb., OF. flnm; river, 35, 8; 

flum^( 0 ), II, 21 ; flom, 65, 5. 
flur, flour, sb^, OF. flur, ^nr {flower, 
35, 14; flour, 49, 3 ; floure, 105, 4. 
flye, sb., OAng. flege, WS. fleoge ',fly, 
158, 8. 

flye(n), see flege (n), flige(n). 
flyghyng, sb., based on flle(n) \ flying, 
flight, 144, 24. 

fnaste(ii), wkv., OE. *fli^tian<fii«st 
‘ breath ’ ; breathe ; inf fnaste, 81,23. 
fg, sb., OE. fa(h), adj,',foe, enemy, 56, 
4. Sth.//. fgn, 230, 22. 

f 5 , adj., ON. far, cogn. with OE.feaw; 
few, 33, 19; pi. fgne, 161, 14; 
INth. fune, 161, 15. 
foangeu f9nge(iL), stv., ON. fanga, 
replacing in pres. OE. fon-feng (R) ; 
seize, catch ; inf. foangen, 226, 16. 
fodder, sb., OE. fodor, io 6 AMX\ fodder', 
ds. foddre, 20a, 31. 
fode, sb., OE. foda ; food, 16, 5, 
fol, see ful. 


fol, adj., OF. fol; foolish; foie, 204, 

II. 

fol, foie, sb.<adj., OF. fol; fool, 300, 
7; foie, 1 37, 30 ; INth. foul, 1 2 7, 10, 
folc, see folk. 

fglde, sb., OM. fald, fald (WS. feald?), 
f; enclosure for sheep or other 
animals, then the sheep, 15,5. 
fold©, sb., OE. folde; ground, land; 
a folden (eSih. adv. phr.) to the 
ground, wholly, 189, 14. 
f9lde(n), stv. OM. faldan (f^dan), 
WS. fealdan-feold (R) ; fold, en- 
wrap; pt.pl. fHd, 68, 19. 
fol5e(n), folge(n), foleche(n), fol- 
we(ii), wkv., OE. folgian ,* follow ; 
inf. (eME. foUjhenn (O), 8, 16); 
folgen, 20, 36; folwen, loi, 9; 
foluwe, 57, 29; pr. 3 sg. (eME. 
foll5he>]> (0), 10, 18) ; fol5e>, 176, 
14; folegeS, 20, 18 ; pt. pi. (eME. 
folechedeu, 6, 9) ; pt. sg. folewede, 
57, 27 ; pr. sbj. pi. (eME. foUshe 
(O), 10, 15). Nth. inf. fallow, 170, 
23; pt. sg. folio wit, 167, 17. Sth. 
inf. V0I5I, 2 %; pr.^.sg. vol3e>, 
219, 21 ; imp. pi. volewetJ, 198, 18. 
foil, folie, see folye. 
folk, folic, sb., OE. fedio; folk, people; 
eME. folc, 5, 32 ; folic ( 0 ), 8, 22 ; 
gpl. follkess (O), 10, 13. Sth. ds. 
volke, 181, 18. 

’ foU^henn, see fol5©(u). 
follkess, foUowit, see folk, fol3e(u), 
folte(ii), wkv., based on OF. folet 
(folt), ‘ fool ’ ; act like a fool ; pp. 
folted as adj., foolish, 97, 3. 
foluwe(ii), folwe(n), see fol3e(n). 
folye, foil (foly), OF. folie 
50, I ; foil, 127, 10; foly, 118, 7. 
fgman, sb., OE, fah-j-niau ; foeman, 
pi. fgmen, 106, 21. 
ffxL, see f§. 

fo(n), stv., OE. fon-feng (R) ; seize, 
take; pt.pl. feng, 223, 2; Sth.//. 
ifon, 183, 18. 

f9iid, fondeu .r55finde(n),funde(n). 
f9iide(n), f9ndi(n), wkv., OE. fan- 
dian, fgndian ; try, test, prove; inf. 
fgnden, 46, 3 ; fgndin, 193, 10 ; pp. 
fgnded, 131, 24. 



368 


GLOSSARY 


fgndynge fondunge. sb,^ OE. fan- 
dung, f§ndung, f . ; temptation ; fgn- 
dyng, 97, 29; pt. fgndunges, ig8, 31. 
fonne, sb. < perh. related to 
Dan. fonnik, * clumsy, stupid per- 
son^ ; fool, 125, 21. 
for, adVs, prep, conj., OE. for; be- 
came, on account of for, i, 18; 
forr (O), 8, 22. Sth. vor ])3en; 
therefor, 183, 29. 
for, ^^?fare(n). 
forbaren, see forbfrs(ii). 
forbede(2a), stv., OE. for beodan 
-bead (2) \forbid,prohibit\pr. i sg. 
forbede, 120, 25; imp. sg. forbede, 
125, 25 ; pt. sg. forbgd, 50, 22 \ pp. 
forbgden, 145, ii. Stb. pt. sg. 
vorbfad (eSth.), 200, 19 ; vorbfd, 
205, 24. 

forbfre(n), eME. forberen, siv., OE. 
forberan-bssr (4); spare, forbear', 
inf. forbgre, 75, 14 ; pt. pi. forbaren, 

forbeme(ii), wkv., OM. forbseman, 
WS. biernan ; bum, consume ; inf 
forbemen, 189, 14 ; forbeme, 184, 
9 ; pp. forbemd, 193, 25. 
forbisne, sb., OE. forbysen f.j exam- 
ple, parable, 21 1, 28. 
forblende(ii), wkv., OE. for+blen- 
dan, blendan; blind \ pp.icxxtbMn- 
dedd (0), 9, 24. 
forbgden, see forbede(ii). 
forbreid0(n), forbrede(n), whfo., 
OE. forbregdan-brasgd (3) ; per- 
vert, corrupt', pr. 2 sg. forbredes, 
18, I ; pp. forbroiden, 17, 3. 
forbrfke(n.), stv., OE. forbrecan 
-brgec (4) ; break in pieces ; pp. for- 
brgken, worn out, 17, 3. 
forbrenne(ii), wkv., OE. forbeman ; 

bum up ; pp. forbrent, 61, 26. 
forbroiden, see forbreide(n). 
forbr^en, see forbr|ke(n). 
forby, prep., OE. for + bi ; beside, in 
respect to, 236, 22. 

foroursed, pp. as adj., OE. for + cur- 
sian ; accursed, 4, 5. 
foro^iS, adj., OE. forcu'S?; cowardly, 
knavish, 185, 7 j superl. forcutfest, 
185, 31. 


fordenie(n), wkv., OE. fordeman; 
condemn, destroy, inf. fordeme, 
184, 2; pt. sg. fordemde, 192, 

5. 

fordfeorde, see forpfere(n). 
forditte(n), wkv., OE*. fordyttan ; 

shut up; pp. fordit, 63, 22, 
ford6(n), anv., OM. fordon-dade 
(WS. dyde) ; ruin, destroy ; mf. 
fordon, 184, 3; ford5, 149, 8; pp. 
fordon, 4, 7; fordong, 120,24. Stb. 
pi. sg. fordiide, 195, 20. 
fordrede(n), stv., OM. fordredan 
-dred, WS. fordr^dan-dred (R); 
dread, fear ; pp. fordred, 25,31. 
fordrive(n), stv., OE. fordrivan-draf 
(i) ; drive away; pp. fordriven, 19, 
29. 

fordronke, adj., OE. fordnincen ; 

drunk, drunken, 239, 12. 
fordiide, see ford6(n). 
foren, prep., OE. foran ; before, 182, 
15 - 

foren, see fare(n). 
forest, sb., OF. forest ; forest, wood, 
169, 21. 

forester, sb., OF. forestier ; forester, 
147, 17. 

fore'warde, forward(e), forewerde, 
sh., OM. forewM, WS. foreweard, 
f. ; precaution, agreement, bargain, 
6, 19; forward, 27, 12; instruction, 
28, 8, pi. forwardes, 7, 19. Sth. 
forwerde, 212, 4; vorewarde, 204, 
5; vorwarde, 204, 13. 
forfaite(n), wko., based on OF. pp. 
or sb. forfait; forfeit; pnf for- 
fait, 235, 18; pt. sg. forfaited, 
234, 2. 

forgaa, anv,, Uth. == Ml. forg9(n); 
OE. forgan; forgo, pass by, dispense 
with, abstain from; inf. forgaa, 
144,22. 

forgat, see forgete(n). 
forgelwe(n), wkv., OE. *forgelwian; 
become yelltm, fade; pr. 2 sg. for- 
gelwes, 18, 2. 

forgifnes, sh., OE. forgifnes,/. ; for- 
giveness, 14I) 28, 

for3ete(n), -gete(n;, stv,, OM. for- 
getan-git, WS. gietan-geat (5),’ . 



GLOSSAJRY 


369 


forget \ inf. forjete, 37, 18; pr. sbj. 
sg. forsete, 37, 17 ; pt. sg. forgat, 22, 
28; pp. forgeten, 23, 6. Sth.. inf, 
forjite, 177, 10; forjyte, 179, 9; 
pr, 3 sg, forsitet, 177, 14; forglit, 
177, ij /r. //. voryetej), 219, 25; 
imp. sg, voryet, 217, 21. 
for5ife(n), for5eve(rL), foryeve(n), 
stv., OM. forgefan-ggef, WS. giefan 
-geaf (5 ) ; forgive ; pr. 3 sg. forsevep, 
124, 16 ; pr. sbj, sg. forrsife (O), 9, 
29 ; foi7eve, 246, ii ; pt. sg. forjaf, 
74, 6; forsive, 45, 28. 
for3ite(n), see fo^et0(n). 
forg9(ii), anv.^ OE. forgan j forgo, 
giveup\ 2«/,forggn, 57, 14. 
forg-iit^ for^yte, see for^ete^n). 
forlifLe(n), stv., OE. forlielan-hsel 
(5) ; conceal; pt. sg. forhal, 58, i ; 
pp. (eME. forholen, 5, i)j forliglen, 
29, 29. 

forhLe-we(ii), siv.^ OE. forheawan 
-heow (2) ; hew down, cut to pieces ; 
eStlu pt. sg. forheou, 181, 21. 
forholen, forEglen, see forEfl0(n). 
forlese(n), siv., OE. forleosan-leas 
(2) ; lose ; pt. sg. forlfs, 5,32; pp. 
(eME. forloren, 2^ 30), forl^ren, 16, 
105 forlorn, 50, 2; forlgre, 213, 
16. "Kt. pp, vorlgre, 21 8, 24. 
forleto(n), stv,, OM, forletan, WS. 
forl^tan-let (R ) ; leave, forsake ; 
pt. sg. forlet, 33, 24. 
forloron, forlgren, see forl0se(xi). 
formast, adj., OE. formest, modified 
by mast<OE. m^st, mast, ‘ most’; 
foremost , first, 69, 3. 
forme, adj.y OE. forma; first, 71, 
18. 

forme, fourme, sb., OF. forme ; 
form, 147, 8. 

fornayse, sb., OF. fomaise ; furnace, 
218, 7- 

fornime(n), siv., OE. fomiman-nom 
(4); take away, remove; pp. for- 
mimen, 27, 4. 

foroTat©n(-ynj^a£fz>,, OE. without, 
172, 13; foroutyn, 173, 7. 
foroLuat = forwhat, ackf., OE. for 
bwset^ wherefore, 21, 17. 
forr, see for. 


forrede(n), wkfv., OM. forredan, WS. 
forrSdan; deceive, seduce, wrong; 
pp. forrM, 23, 32; forrad, 56, 22. 
eStH./r. 3 sg. forreadeg, 194. 24. 
forrouth, forrowtli, prep, adv., cfl 
Ban. forad; before, forward, 170, 
SI ; torrdwth, 170, 27. 
forrpi, see forpl. 

forsaid, forseid, adj. <; pp., OE. 
foresecgan ; foresaid, 159, 9. StJti. 
forseyed, 222, 28. 

forsake (n), stv., OE. forsacan-soc 
(6) ; forsake ; inf, forsalce, 56, 26 ; 
pr. 3 sg. forsake®, 16, 17. eSth. 
pr. 3 sg. vorsakest, 193, ir. 
forsealde(n), wkv., OE. for + OF. 
escalder; scald completely; pt, sg. 
forscaldede, 195, 1 9. 
forseid(-seyd), see forsaid. 
forsitte(rL), stv., OE. forsittan-sset 
(5)5 neglect, delay; StE. pt. sbj. 
sg. forsfte, 1S9, 13. 
forso]?, forsope, adv., OE. fors6J»; 
forsooth, 42, 28; fors6])e, 47, 27. 
Sth. vorzoje, 215, 10. 
forstand©(n), stv., OE. forstandan 
-stod (6) ; csvail, profit ; pt. sg. 
forstod, 6, 17; pt. sbj. sg. forstode, 
2, 17. 

forstoppe(n), wkv., ON. stoppa, 
’•'forstoppa ? ; stop up, obstruct ; 
Bth. pr.pl. forstoppe®, 201, 12. 
forswal3©(n), stv., OE. forswelgan 
-swealh (3) ; swallow up, destroy ; 
inf. forswalse, 188, 16. 
fors-wat, see forswft©(n). 
forswele(n), wkv., OM. fo^swela7^^ 
WS. swHan; hum up; pp. for- 
swelde, 188, 13. 

fors'W©lte(n), wkv., OE, *forsweltan; 
kill, destroy; inf, forswelten, 194, 
29. 

forswfre(3i), siv., OE. forswerian 
-sw6r(6) {forswear, commit perjury; 
pp. (eME.) forsworen, 2, 29. Sth. 
pp. vorswgre, 207, ii. 
forswfrynge, sb., cf. iorswfren;. 
perjury, 147, 21. 

fors-w§t©(ii), wkv., OE. *forsw^tan ; 
weary with labor, spoil with sweat- 
ing; Nth.//, forswat, 166, %. 


B b 



370 


GLOSSARY 


forsworeiL, see forswfre(iL). 

I*ortj sb,, De Fors or de Foriibus; 
Willelm of, Earl of Albemarle, 
227, 4. 

fortende, adj., OE. feowerteotJa ; 
fourteenth^ 197, 9. ITtli. faurtend, 

152. 19. 

forV, fur]? (furpe), adv.^ OE. fortJ; 
forth^ 17, 6; fnrp, 99, 16; furpe, 
99, 5; furth, 137, 6. Sth.. vor’5, 
185, I. 

fortSan, adv,, OE. for tJon ; therefore^ 
thereupon^ 24, 30. 

for^cume(n), stv.^ OE. for?5cuman 
-com (cwom) (4) ; come forih^ 
appear \ pp. for^cumen, 24, 8. 
f6i^e(2i), wkv,^ OE. for^ian ; pro- 
mote, ejfect, further', inf. fBrSen, 
17, 19; pp, foTpedd (0), 8, 18. 
forper, adj,, OE. fnitSTa; fore,f7‘(nit, 
231, 23. 

forUfare, sb., eME. = Ml. forSfare; 
OE. for^faru ; departure, death, 
191, 7. 

forpfere(n), wkv., OE. forSferan ; go 
fo9th', die', eME.//, j;^. fordfeorde, 
5, 16. 

forpi, forpie, adv. conj,, OE. for py ; 
because, therefore, i, 2 ; forrpl (O), 
8, 24; forpie, 154, 18, StE. vorpi, 

198. 19. 

forpinke(ii), vokv., OE. forSenceau 
-i&ohte (^obte); misthink, dislike, 
repent', pr. 3 sg. forpingketh, 212, 
23. StE. forpiinche??, 194, 12. 
forpirmar, adv., IftE. — Ml. furper- 
mjr ; OE. furtyer + ; further- 

more, 166, 8. 

for^riEt, adv., OE. foi^riht; right 
forth, straightway, 183, 16. 
forpimoEe(B.) , see forpinke(n). 
for%ward, forlSwar, ado., OM. for?5- 
-ward, WS. weard; contimtally, 
always, 18, 20; foi^war, 87, 16. 
foz^weie, sb., OE. forlSweg; de- 
parture, journey, 27, 27. 
forto, prep., OE. for to ; until, 221, 
32- 

fortravale(ii), wko., OE. for + OF, 
trayailer; tire out', KTtE, pp. for- , 
trayalit, 171, 26. [ 


fortune, sb., OF. fortune; fortune, 

243, 16. 

forward(e), see forewarde. 
forwerpe(n), stv., OE. forweorpan 
-wearp (3) ; reject, cast away ; inf. 
forrwerrpenn (O), 9, 23. 
forwEy, (idv., OE. for + hwy ; because, 

244, 19. 

forwitE, adv., ONth. *forwr(y ; before, 
128, 16. 

forwrappe(n), wkv., origin un- 
certain ; wrap up ; pp. forwrapped, 
240, 22. 

forwre3e(n) ; wkv., OE. forwregan; 

accuse; forwre^en, 179, 8. 
forwundIe(rL), wkv., StE. = Ml. for- 
wunde(n) ; OE. forwundian (wun- 
dian) ; wound ; pp. forwunded, 
190, 9. 

forwurt$e(n), sPv., OE. forwecr^Jan 
-weartS (3) ; perish, go wrong; inf. 
furwurtien, 193, 31 ; pr. 3 sg. for- 
wurtJes, 18, 2 ; pp. forwurtSe, 1S8, 2. 
foryeve(n), see for5ife(n). 
fosterling, sb., OE. fostorling ; foster- 
child, 190, 8. 

fostir, fostyr, sb., OE. ioster ; foster, 
nursling, 173, 12; fostyr, 175, i6. 
fostre(n), wkv., OE. fostrian; foster", 
pp. fostrid, 53, 21. 
fostrild, sb., based on OE. fostor4 
Eild; nurse, >2^1, 6. 
fot, sb., OE. fot; foot, 28, 16; on 
fbte, on foot, 6, 29 ; pi. fet, 3, 6 ; 
fetg, 138, 19. lITtE. fut, 168, 6. 
fotsteppe, sb., OE. fot + steppe ; 

footstep; pi. fetsteppes, 14, 4. 
foul, foul, fowle, see fol, fill, fugel. 
fdunde(n), wkv., OE. fundian ; seek, 
endeavor; proceed', pt. sg. founded, 
157, 22. 

four, fourme, see fewer, forme. 
fourme(n), wkfv., OF. former; form; 

pp. fourmed, 102, 28. 
fourtene, see fowrtene. 
fourty, see fowerti. 
fowerti, adj., OE. feowertig ; forty, 
33, 29; fowwerrtis (O), 12, 10; 
Eirti, 214, 6 . 

fowerti5pe, sb., OE. feowerteo^e; 
fourteenth, 236, 23. Cf, fortSnde. 



GLOSSARY 


37T 


fowhel, fowle, see fugel. 
fowre, adj., OE. feower ; four^ 8, i ; 
foure, 70, 29. eSth. feouwer, 1S5, 
20. 

fowrtene, fourtene, adj.^ OM. 
feowertene, WS. -tiene; fotirteeii, 
33, 2; fourtene, 118, 6. eSttu 
feouwertene, 1S5, 5. 
fowwerrti^, see fowerti. 
foycyn, sb. , OF. foy son ; plenty^ power, 
success, 96, 4; fuysoune, 141, 31. 
fca, adv, prep,, eME., Iftli. = Ml. 

frg ; fro 7 n, 6, 31; 128, 21. 
fram, prep, adv,, OE. fram, frgm; 
fro 77 t, 4, 18. Sth. vrom, 19S, 2; 
vram, 217, 10, 

frame, frame, sb,, ON. frami, cogn. 
OE. fram, * valiant ’ ; advantage, 
p 7 'ofit \ eME'. frame, 8, 21; frame, 
14, 20, 

Eranee, Eraunoe, sh,, OF. France; 

Jfrance, 7, 10; Fraunce, 221, 13. 
Eranelxe, Prankys, adj,, Nth, =s Ml., 
Sth. Frenkish ; ONth. Francisc or 
F rencisc modified by Franc ; French, 
127, 6; Francbe, 157, 23. 
Praunoe, see France, 
fraunchise, sb, , OF. franchise ; fran- 
chise^ 232, 26. 
frayne(ii), see freiiLe(n). 
fre, adj., OE. freo ; free, 74, 17; 
(SEMI.) freo, 42, 21. eSth. freo, 
187, 19. 

fredom, fredam, sh., OE. freedom ; 
freedom, 84, ii; fredam, 232, 
26. 

freend, see fr§n.d. 

freiae(rL), stwhv., OM. *fregnan, WS. 
frignan-frsegn (3); question, in- 
quire, ash; inf, frayne, 106, 29; 
wk.pt. sg. freinde, 21, 17; freinede, 
194, 6. 

freis, adj,. Nth. ^ Ml. fresh ; OE. 

fersc ; fresh, 151,31. 
frek, ^j., OE. free; bold, insolent, 

1579 23. 

frekly, adv., OE. frecllce; boldly, 
171, 16. 

frehch, adj., Sth. = Ml. frell; OE. 
freollc; freely, 232, 26; eME. 
freoHch, 192, 9. 


fremarij sh., OE. freoman ; freeman, 
84, 8. 

fremde, see feemede. 
frgme, sb., OE. fremu; profit, ad- 
vantage, 226, 8. 

fremede, fremde, adj. , OE. fremede, 
fremde; strange, foreigJt, 144, 14; 
fremde, 177, 10, 

frfme(n), w^., OE. fremman; pro-, 
mote, profit, do; inf. fr|me, 78, 12. 
French, Frensch, Freynsch, adj,, 
OE. Frencisc; French, 210, 12; 
Frensch, 225, 3 ; Freynsch, 224, 19. 
frenchype, see frendschipe. 
frend, freend, sb., OE. freond ; 
fidend; frende, 76, 10; pi. (eME. 
freond, 6, 12) frend, 2, 2 ; freendes, 
241, 25. 

frendschipe, sh., OE. freondscipe ; 
friendship; eME. freontschipe, 192, 
8; frenchype, 144, ax. 
freo, see fre. 

freoboren, adj., ©MB. Ml. frebgren; 
OE. freo+_^, boren; noble born, 
freeborn, 192, ii. 
freollch, see :fr§lich. 
freond, see frend. 
freontsciiip©, see frendschipe. 
fret© (frft©), sb., OM. *fret, WS. 

*'h^t,j.; food, 40, 12. 
frfte(n), stv,, OE. fretan-frat (5); 
devour, eat up ; pt. sg. frft, 198, 23 ; 
pp, freten, 23, 5. 

Froynsoh, see French. 

Fridai, Fridsei (Fridawes), sb., 
OE. Frigdseg ; Friday ; Fndssi 
(eME.), 4, 31 ; pL Fridawes, 200, 2. 
Sth. VrTdeie, 199, 33. 
frijte, sb., OE. fyrhtu, OM. 

fright, 59, 13. 

frigti, adj,, OS. *^htig; tinnd, 28, 
15 ‘ 

frigtShfd, sb., OM. *f^htigh£ed, W 3 ^ 
*fyrhtighsed ; timidity, 26, 30- 
frigtilike, adv., OE. *fyrhtiglTce ; 

with fear, timidly, 25, 3. 
frith, sb^ OE. friSf; forest, wood, 
162, 25. 

frit 5 ©(n), whv., OE. fritJian; keep in 
peace, 'preserve, free ; pr. sbj. sg. 
fritSe, 30, 15, 


B b 2 



372 


GLOSSARY 


frg, frp?, adv* prep.^ ON. fra, cogn. 

with OE. fram, fr^ni ; from, I5j 3- 
jErdfre(ii), wkv,, OE. frofrian; com- 
fort', inf fiofrena (0), 12, 14. 
Stli. inf vrovren, 201, 2. 
fpoit, see finiit, 

frgtyng, sk, based on OF. froter, 
'mb’; rubbing, harsh sounding, 
^ 225, 26. 

frou^, adj,, suggests OE. *fr6h., peril . 
ON. liar, ‘swift’; fickle, dial. 
frough (frow), 57, 30. 
fruit, fmt (froit), sb., OF. fruit, 27, 
23; fruyt, 238, 28; froit, 148, 26; 
fnit, 100, 19; frute, 134, 16. 
frumschaft, sb,, OE. frumsceaft, /. ; 

creation, 191, 16. 
fmt, fmte, see fruit, 
fmtestfre, sb., OF. fniit + ME. stgre; 

female fruitselUr, 237, 22. 
fagel, ftiiiel, fowle, foul, sh., pL 
fugeles ; (fk. fugel (ol) ; bird, fowl, 
22,17; fowie, 145, 4; foul, 172,6, 
pL fu5cles, 178, 27 ; fubeles, 193, 
22; fowheles, 144, 24. Sth-voael; 
215, 18. 

fuiLten, see fi5te(ii). 

ful, adj,, adv,, OE. ful ; full, 2, 31 ; 

fol, 49, 12 ; fnlle, adij,, 119, 14. 
ful, see fulle(iL). 

ful, foul, adj,, OE. fill ; foul, 3, 6 ; 

85 7 30 > 48, 10. StE. 

voul, 217, 25. 

fiilfllle(ii), fulfyll0(u), wka,, OE. 
fulfyllan ; fulfih complete, satisfy ; 
inf fulfillen, 104, 12 ; fulfylle, 95, 
6; fulfill e, 244, 5; pp. fulflld, 103, 
15 ; fulfyllt. III, 18. NtE. pr.pl, 
fulfill, 144, 9; p^- ppk fulfiUand, 
146, 4. 

fuIh.tne(tL), wkv,, OE. *fiilhtniau; 

baptize’, pp, fulllitnedd (O), ii, 23. 
fuILe(n), who,, OE. fullian; fill, be 
full', imp, ful, 18, 6. 
l?u.lle(u), see fLlle(iL), 
fulluht, sh,, OE. falwikt, ftillidit; 

baptism fulluhbt (0), 8, 14. 
fully, ado)., OE. fullice 240, 15. 

fulste(n), whv,, Stlu-Ml. filste(n) ; 
OE. fylstan ; help, assist ; inf 
fiilste^ X91, 15. 


fulsuju, adj., OE. fulsum; plentiful, 
24, 25. 

fulsumhfd, sb,, OE. *fulsamh^d ; 

plenty, copiousness, 23, 32. 
fultum, sb,, OE. fultum ; help ; ds. 
fultume, 226, I. 

fundeCn), whv.,Qi^, i(ycAtx', found, 
establish ; ZSTtE, inf. fund, 130, 13. 

funde(n), foiide(n), wkv., OE. 

fundian, seek, go ; inf, fonde, 94, 5. 
funde(n), fundun, see fmde(ii). 
fune, see fQ (fo). 

funtfat, sb, , OF. funt + OE. fset ; font, 
baptismal vessel, 16, 23. 
fSr, fiirst, fur]>, see fir, first, fort?. 
fiir]je, adj., OE. feoweiiJa; fourth, 
222, 22. 

furti, see fowerti. 

far’wufSe, see foxwui^Se(rL). 

fiis, adj., OE. fiis; eager, ready, 132, 

fuse(ii), whv., StbL. = Ml. fise(n) ; 
OE. f>san; make ready', pt. sg. 
fusde, 186, 8. 

fut, fuysoune, see fot, foysyn. 
fyfte, fyftene, see flfte, fiftene. 
fylden, see fille(n). 
fyUynge, fyllyng, sb,, OE. *fyllung, 
f ; filling, refreshment, restoration, 
lor, 3. 

fylthe, fyiide(n), see findeCn). 


G. 

ga, , irth. = Ml. g9(n) ; OE.gan; 
go; pr, 3 sg. gase, 161, ii ; pt.pL 
5ede, 140, 22. INtb. pi. sg. 5ude 
=:56de, 167, 15 ; pt, pi, 5eid « Bed, 
167, 7. Cf. gpn. 

gabbo, sb., ON. gabb, n . ; jest, im- 
posture, 37, 9. 

Gabriel, sb., OF. Gabriel; Gabriel', 
gs, Gabrieles, 199, 7. 

gadere(a), wkv,, OE. gaderian; 
gather', inf gaderen, 34, 6 : gadere, 
35 » H’> fP' gadered, 2, 21. 35 art 3 i. 
gader, geder, see geder. StE. inf. 
gederen, 202, 6 ; pr.ppl, gederinde, 
202, 23. 



GLOSSARY 


373 


gaderinge, gadering, sh,, OE. ga- 
dening, f,\ gathering, assembly', 
gadering, 2, 23. 
g^ede, giel^ see g9(n), ^eld. 
g£n, see ^en. 
gsere, gsst, see ^en, ^et. 
gaf(e), see 5eve(n), geve(n). 
gai, see gay. 

gain, wkv.. Nth. = Ml. gaine(n) ; ON. 

gegna, gagna ; obtain, gain, 160, 7. 
galai(y), OF. galei; galley, 164, 
25 ; galaies, 163, 15. 
galiSte, ^ 3 ., OF. galiote ; small galley, 
164, 13. 

gall, ONth, galla, WS. gealla; 

gall, bitterness, anger, 129, 20. 
Q-alway, Q-aleway, sb., Galloway, 
221, 28; Galeway, 222, 14. 
galwes, sh.pL regularly ; OM. galga, 
WS. gealga, mfl. by ON. galgi ? ; 
gallows, 86, 3. 

galwetre, sb., OE.galgatreo ; gallows 
tree, 86, ii. 

gamen, game, gammyn, sb., OE. 
gamen ; game, sport, jest ; gamen, 
79, 7 ; game, 109, 4. Nth., gammyn, 

16?, 15- 

gan, see gimie(n). 
gange(n), g9nge(n), stv., OE. gan- 
gau-geng (R) ; go, m(yve ; inf. gan- 
gen, 1,, 5; ggnge, 86, 6; /r. //. 
gangen, i8, 7. Cf. 5eonge(n). 
gannlnde, see g9(n). 
gape(n), wkv., ON. gapa, cognate, 
OE.geapan; gape \ pr. 3 sg. gapeS, 
19,8. 

gar©, sb., ©MB. s= Ml. ggr ; OE. gar, 
gara; spear \ pi. garen, 186, 15. 
gare(n), garris, gart, see gfr©(n). 
garring, sb., based ongarren < MHG ; 

chatter, roar, 224, 15. 
gast, gaste, sb.. Nth, = Ml. ggst ; OE. 
gast; ghost, spirit, 131, 24; gast?, 
142, 28. 

gast, sb., OE. gast, short form ; spirit, 
ghost, 20, 22. 

gastely, a^l/., Nth. = Ml. g9Stly ; OE. 

gastlic; spiritual, 146, 26. 
gat, see g©t©(n). 

gate, gat, sb., ON. gata; gait, dial. 
gate, strut, way, maimer, 59, 5; 


gat, 89, 10; gate, 89, 23. Nth. 
gate, 137, 7; INth. gat, 167, zi. 
Cf. 3at©. 

gat©(n)=5at0(n), wkv., OE. geatan 
(g^tan, getan) ; grant, conce^ ; pt. 
sg. gatte, 34, 30. 

gaud, sb.. Nth. = Ml. gaude ; OF. 

*gaude perh. ; trick, wile : i6o, 7. 
gay, gai, ad}., OF. gai; gay, 154, 24 ; 

gai, 158, 25. 
ge, gear, see pu, ^er. 
gede, 5ed©, wkv. def, OE. geeode, 
pt. of OE. gegan ; see g9(n). 
geder, wh)., Nth. = Ml. gadere(ji) ; 
gather', pt. sg. gederd, 135, ii; 
gedird, 138, 32. 

gederen, gederinde, see geder©(n). 
gees, gef, see gos, 5if. 

GefEree, sb., OE. Geoffrey ; Geoffrey J 
gs. Geffrees, 227, 6. 
gegge, sh., OF. giiigue, AN. gigge 
(gegge?); maid, frivolous woman. 


^ 9 - . ^ 

gehaten, geld, see 5ehat©(n;, ^dld. 
g©lde(n), gelt, see 5elde(n), gilt, 
generally, adv., OF. generals ME. 

ly; generally, 146, 15. 
genge, sb., ON. gengi ; company, f oh 
lowing, army, 5, 10. 
iente, adj., OF. gent ; gentle, noble, 
III, 22. 

ientil, adj.,OY, gentil ; noble, 207, 2 1. 
gentilman, sb., OF. gentil + ME. 

man ; gentleman, 224, 20. 
ger, gSre, see 5©r. 

gfre(n), gax©(n), wkv., ON. gorva 
(gerva), cogn. with OE. gearwian, 
gerwan ; prepare, make ; inf gfren, 
33 > 25 ; pt. sg. gait, 125, 29. Nth. 
inf. ger, 138, 5 ; pr. 3 sg. pims, 
174, 2; pt. pi. gert, 155, 26; pt. 
sbj. sg. gert, 141, 7. 
gerk©(n),w3?2., SEMI, aa Ml, 5arke(n); 
OM. garkian, WS. gearcian; pre-- 
pare, inf. gerken, 27, 31. 
gerlpnd, sh., OF. gerlande; garland, 
V 215, 22. 

German, adj. sh., OF. Germain; 

German', pi. Germans, 222, 24. 
Germania, sh., I^t. Germania ; Ger^ 
many, 222, 23, 



374 


GLOSSARY 


gern, ac^v.y OE. geome mod. by ON. 

giam; eagerly earnestly^ 154, 18. 
G-erson, sA, Lat. Gessen; Goshen^ 

31? T* 

gexsaame, sA, OE. gersume < ON. 

gersami ; treasure^ 46, 5. 
gert, see gfre(iL). 

gest, sb., OM. gest, WS. giest ; infl. 
by ON. gestr ; guest ; pL gestes, 4, 
12. 

^0st(e), sb., OF. geste; story, achieve- 
ment, MnE.>^A 116, 7; gest, 132, 
29 ; pL jestes, 130, i. 
get, g§te, see ^et- 

^eie(n),' 5 tv., ON. geta-gat (5), cogn. 
with and later displacing OM.getan, 
WS, gietan ; get, obtain ; hif. gete, 
50, ir ; pt. sg. gat, So, 2. ISfh.pr, 
2 sg. gettes, 141, 31 ; P^‘ 

172, 26. 

gfte(ii), gete(2i), wkv., ON. gSta ; 
guard, keep, take care of\ Nth., inf. 
get, I55> 25 ; imp. sg. gft, 161 22. 
gettes, see gete(2j). 
gej), g9(n). 

gevelie, adj., OE. ^e-efenlic ; equal, 
like, 18, 31. 
geven, see 5eve(n). 
geve(iL), stv., ON. gefa, cogn. with 
and later displacing OM. gefan-gsef, 
WS. giefan-geaf (5) ; give ; pU sg. 
ga% 109, 28. 

gey2ie(n), wkv., ON. gegna ; gain ; 

pt sg. geyned, 54, 29, 
ghe, gif, see he, 5if. 
gife(rL), see give(n). 
gUde, see gylde. 
gildeday, see gyldeday. 
gile, sk, OF. guile, AN. gile ; guile, 
treachery, 160, 6. 

^ileri, ^Uery, sh., OF. gillerie ; 

deceit, loi, 17,* gillery, 147, 15. 
gilt, sA, OK gylt ; gtdU, 28, 6 ; ds, 
gilte, 32, 25. Kt. ds, gelte, 218, 10. 
giltelggs, adf,, OE. gylt + 1 ^ ; guilt- 
less, 238, 9. 

iin, sb., OF. engin ; gm, snare, in- 
gemtity; ds, ginne, 46, 3j gynne^ 
ixi, 25. 

adj., Sth. = MK Sung ; based oq 
WS. geong? ; young, 18J 22. 


giniivre, sb., OE. gingifre mod. by 
OF. gingimhre, gingibre; ginger. 


202, 25. 

ginne(n), stv,, OE. (on)ginnan-gann 
(3); begin; pt. sg. gan, 21, 6 ^ 
can-gan, 106, 14; P^^ gunen, 

31, 26; gonnen, 63, 7 ; gunne, 1S4, 
I ; goiine, 205, 16. Nth. pt. sg. 
giin, 135, 6 ; pt. pi. gun, 137, ii. 
Sth./^J*^. gon, iSi, 7; gim, 182, 
16. 

gist, sb., Sth. = Ml, gest; WS. giest, 
OM. gest, infl. by ON. gestr and 


gista ; guest, 199, 27. 
give(n), gyve(iL), stv., ON. gefa, 
cogn. with and later displacing OM. 
gefan-g«f, WS. giefan-geaf (5); 
give; inf. gifenn (.O), 12, 16; pr. 
2 sg. givest, 50, 5 ; pr. shj. sg. gif, 
II 2, 12; //.given, 55, 16; gyven, 
75, 27. Nth. inf. gife, 130, 31 ; 
gyffe, 145, 16 : pr. shj. pi. gyfe, 146, 


19. 

given, see 5eve(n). 
glad, adj., OE. glad; glad; comp. 
gladdore, 205, 10. Sth, gled, 195, 
26. 

glade (n), who., OE.gladian; gladden, 
be glad; inf. glade, 67, 15 ; gladen, 
102, II ; pt.pl gladed, 103, 17, 
gladly, adv., OE. glsedlice; gladly, 
146, 31. Sth. gledliche, 215, 5. 
gladnesse, gladnes, sb., OE. glaed- 
ness,/ ; gladness, 44, 7 ; gladnes, 


102, 10. 

glas, sh., OE. glass ; glass, 56, 14. 
glaiS, adj., ON. gla^Sr, cogn. with OE. 

glsed ; glad, happy; pL gla?Se, 29,9. 
gle, sb., OE. gleo(w) ; glee, joy, so 7 ig, 
128, 4; SEMI, gleo, 36, 29. Nth. 
glen, 149, 28. 
gled, see glad. 

gl0die(n), who., Sth, = Ml. gladen; 
OE. gladian ; gladden ; inf. gledien, 
199, 28. 

gledliche, see gladly, 
glfm, sb,, OE.gl^m; gleam, splendor^ 
228, II. 

gleo, gleu, see gle. 

gleyve, sb., OF. glaive; sword, glaive; 

. pi gUyyes, 60, 25. 



GLOSSARY 375 


glide (n), siv*y OE. glidan-glad (i) ; 
glide, ^oceed ; pr. 3 sg, glide??, 19 1, 
17; glide, 37, 21. 
glifneCn), wkv,, cf, Scotch glifF, ‘ a 
glance ^ ; glance, look ; Iffth. pt. sg.‘ 
gliffnit, 173, 2. 

glgrie, sd,, OF. glorie; glory, loi, 
22. * 

gl9rifie(n), wkv., OF. glorifier; 
glorify, in/.glgrifien, 104, 13; pp. 
glgr^de, 139, 23. 

glgryous, adj,, OF. glorius; glonous, 
excellent, 117, 9. 

gloterie, sb., OF. gluterie ; gluttony ; 
54 > ^ 3 * 

glotonye, glotonie, sb., OF. glou- 
tonie ; gluttony, 49, 16 ; glotonie, 
206, 18. 

glotiand, see glo'we(ii). 

Q-loucester, sb., OE. Gleawecester 
(Glowe-); Gloucester, 5, 12; Glow- 
^estre, 227, 2. 

glove, sb., OE. glof,/ ; gl<yve, H2, S. 

Sth.//, gloven, 190, ii. 
Glowchestre, see Gloucester, 
glowe (n), siv., OE. glowan-gleow 
(R); glow, be radiant with heat\ 
pr. ppl. glowende, 60, 23. IJ’th. 
pr.ppl. glouand, 151, 32. 
guede, OM. *gnede, WS. ’•‘gniede; 

stingy, parswio 7 iiotis, 48, 27. 
gnedeliclie, adv., OM. *gnedelice, 
WS. *gmedelice; sparingly, 202,4. 
see g9(n). 

God, Godd, sb.^ OE. god; God\ 
Godd (O), 9, 29; ds, Gode, 16, 21 ; 
gs. Godes, I, 4; Goddys, 91, 17. 
ITth. gs. Goddis, 1 30, 30 ; gs. with- 
out ending, God sake, 138, 4; pL 
goddes, 135, 10. Sth. group gs. 
God Almi5tties, 232, 17. 
god, good, ac^\, OE. god; good, 2, 
3; good, 32, 3; comp, bettre (OE. 
betera), 9, ii ; better, 4, 26 ; bettur, 
128, 18 ; superl. best, 29, 13. HTth. 
gud^, 141, ji. 9 tli. co 7 n.p. betre, 

^ 177, 6 ; superl. betste, 177, 27; 
betst,J79, 22. Kt. guod, 216, 31; 
wk. guoden, 217, 3, 
god, .fA, OE. god, neut,* property, 
‘foealth, good^, 3, 2 ; pi. gode, 164, 


16 ; godes, 104, 20. "Kt.pl. guodes, 
215, 22. 

Godard, sb., Godard, 76, 10. 
godday, sb., OE. god + d^g; good- 
day, 47, 7. 

goddes, goddis, see God, 
goddspell (O), later gospell, j^.,OE. 
godspel; gospel, 8, 19; gospelle, 
X23, 5 ; godspel, 149, 13. Sbh. ds. 
godspelle, 210, 21 ; godespelle, 
3 II, 27. 

goddspellboc (O), sb., OE- godspelF 
boc; book of the gospel, ii, 15. 
goddspellwrihlite (O), sb., OE. 
godspel + wyrhta (wryhta) ; gospel- 
writer, lit. -worker, -maker, ii, 5. 
goddys, see God. 

god0(n), wkv., OE. godian ; hnprove, 
e 7 idow, enrich ; pt. sg. goded, 4, 14, 
godenesse, see godnesse. 
godespelle, see goddspell. 
godle^^o (O), sb., ON. g6??leikr, infl. 

by OE. god?; goodness, 12, 29. 
godnesse, sb., OE. godness,^ ; good- 
ness, favor, II, 15; godenesse, 
98, 4. 

godspelle, ^^^-goddspell. 

Godwine, ^< 5 ,, OE. Godwine ; Godwin, 
earl and father of Harold, 204, 27. 
gold, sb., OE. gold, gold ; gold ; 2, 5 ; 
ds. golde, 40, 24. 

Goli, sb., OF. Goli?; Goliah, 131, 3. 
Goxaore,j^.,OE.Goinorre; Gomorrah, 

gon, goim,e(ii;, see gume(iL). 
g9(n), anv., OE, gan-eode (seode) ; 
inf. ggn, 25, 24; g9, 42, 28 ; ggg, 
227, 23; /r. 2 sg. g9st^ 124, 21 ; 

3 7; g§th, 125, 18; 

g99th, 244, 23 ; pr. pi g9n, 37, 25 ; 
g99n, 240, 10; pr. sbj. sg. (eME. 
ga, 196, 2) ; pr. sbj.pl. g9n, 15, 7 ; 
imp. sg. gg, 18, 17 ; i/np. sg. with 
inf gg tel, go tell, 65, 10 ; imp.pl. 
ggtJ, 197, 21 •, pr. ppl. ggand, 103, 
29; pt. 2 sg. edest, 51, 9 ; pt. sg. 
(eME. gSde, 3, 9; i^de, 0, 39); 
gede, 28, 31 ; set « Sed (?), 44, 32 ; 
pt. pi. ieden, 3, 28; seden, 35, 24; 
pt. sbj. sg. ede, 53, 17 ; pp. gpne, 
96, 16; g9ii, 22S, 22. Nth. ga, 



376 


GLOSSARY 


q, StK /n pi, 197, 17; 
pr, ppl, (eSth.) ganijinde, 189, 16; 
pt, sg, (eSth.) eode, 186, 19; yede, 
210, 22 ; pUpl. yede, 212, ii ; pp, 
yggn, 64, 25. Kt. inf, guo, 218, 
14; 3 ge>, 215, 19; imp,^ 

sg, guo, 217, 8; pp, yguo = igo, 
216, 5. 

gfXLg, sh,, OE. gang, g^ng; g02ng, 
gang; affair, ^ 1 ,^, 
g§ng©(ii), good, see gaiige(2i), god. 
goodman, sb., OE. god +man; good- 
man, husbandman, 2 12, 2. 
gos, sb.j OE. gos; goose; pi. gees, 86, 
18. 

gospeU, see goddspell. 

ggst, sb., OE. ghost i spirit, 48, 4. 

ggst, see gg{n). 

ggstUoh, ac^‘., OE.gastHc,* .spiritual, 
198, 29. 

ggt, sb., OE. gat ; goat, 86, 17. 

G^te, G-gthe, sh., OE. Gota; Goth; 
pi, Ggtes, 221, II ; Ggthes, 221, 15. 

ggth, gf8, g9(n). 

goule(ii), 'wkv,, ON. gaula; howl; 

pr.pl, goule, 78, 25. 
govomaunce, sb,, OE. gouveraance ; 

governme^tt, 234, 23. 
goveme(n), wkv., OF. govemer ; 
govern] rule; pr. 3 sg, governe>, 
lOX, I. 

grace, sb,, OF. grace ; grace, favor, 
16, 28. __ 

gracyous, gracious, adj, _ OT. 
gracieus ; gracious, 96, i ; gracious, 

335: 19- ^ , 

gradde, see grede(n). 

grame, sb,, OE. grama ; a 7 zger, harm, 

gramere, j^.,OF. giamaire ; grammar, 
224, 28. 

gramersoole, sb,, OF. gramaire + 
OE. scol, f mod. by OF. escolc ; 
grammar-school, 224, 28. 
grante(n), grantit, see graunte(n). 
grat, see grft. 

Gratianxis, sh., Lat. Gratianus ; 
Gratian, 221, 13. 

graimte(n), wh}., OF.granter; grant, 
give; pr, shj, grauiite, 45, 22 : imp, 
sg, grawnte, 123, 28; pt, sg. 


grauntyd, 107, 28 ; ^5^. pL graunted, 
89, 21,* grauntede, 222, 12; pp, 
graunted, 73, 16, NtE. pr, 2 sg. 
grauntes, 137, 32 ; pt, pi. grantit, 
• 170, 1 5. StE. inf, granti, 209, 30 ; 

pp. igranted, 45, 30. 
grave, sb., OE. grsf, /. ; grave, 54, 
24. NtE. gra¥e, 143, ii. 
grav©(n), stv., OE. grafan-grof (6) ; 
grave, dig, bury, inf, gi-ave, 83, 26; 
pp, graven, 33, I5* ^ 

grawnte, see grauiite(n). 
gray, adj,, OE. gr^g; gray, 229, 8. 
graytE, adj, ON. grei^Jr; ready, 
qtiick; superl, graythest, 137, 7. 
gray}>e(n), see greipe(n). 
grf at, see grft. 

Grece, sh,^ OF. Griece; Greece, 126, 5. 
grede(n), wkv., OM. gredan, WS. 
grmdan ; cry out ; inf grede, 36, 6. 
StE. pr, pi. grede>, 215, 16; pr. 
sbj. pi, giede we, 21 1, 19 ; pt, sg, 
gradde, 205, 21. 

grfdi, codj.i StE. = Ml. gredi; WS. 
gr^dig, OM. gredig ; greedy, comp, 
grfdlure, 202, 13. 

grf dinesse, sb., StE. « Ml. gredi- 
nesse; WS.gricdijness, OM. gredig- 
ness,^. ; greediness, 202, 13. 
Gregorie, Gregory, sb., OF. Gre- 
gorie, Gregory; Gregorie, 201, 6, 
grfditLTe, see grfdi. 
grei]?0(E), gray]70(n), wkv,., ON. 
greitJa ; prepare, aid ; inf grei])e, 
49, 1 o ; graype, 65,12; pp. grey>ed, 
86, 30. 

grfme(n), StE. grfmi0(n), wkv,, 
OE. gremian ; anger, irritate ; inf, 
grfme, 78, 13. eStE. inf. gremien, 
193, 7- 

grene, adj., OE. grene; green, 79, 9. 
greiin©(n), wkv., OE. g^ennian ; 
grm, gtcLsh the teeth ; inf. grenne, 
51, ; pt.sg. grermede, 61, 13. 

greet, sb., eME. = Ml. gret; OE. 

greot ; sand, gravel, grit, 200, 8. 
gresse, grese, sb., OE. grses, gsers; 

gretss, 103, 3 ; grese, 152, i. 
grfste, see grft. 

grft, grfte, adj,, OE. great; greai^ 
grgtf; 137, «7;-sME. gifat, 193, 8 j 



GLOSSARY 377 


comp, grettore, 51, ii ; gretter, 235, 
32 j superL grettest, 236, 6 ; grgste, 
198, 32. Kt. griat, 212, gratj 
2x8, 26. 

grete, sb., OUTth. *grete ; cf. ON. 

grseti ; weeping, sorrow, 132, ii. 
grete(2i), stv., OM. gretan, WS. 
gr^tan-gret (R) ; weep ; pr. ppL 
gretand, 93, 8 ; pt. sg. gret, 28, 31 ; 
pt. pi. greten, 77, 18 ; pp. grete, 93, 

grete (n), wkv., OE. gretan ; greet, 
salute ; pr. 3 sg. gretetJ, 31, 30; pt. 
sg. grette, 78, 23. 

grf tly , adv.^ OE. great + ly ; greatly, 

91, 32. 

gretter, grettore, see grft. 
greve(n), wkv., OF. grever; grieve, 
injure', znf.gtQve,6^, 33; greven, 
71, 24. 

grew, see growe(n). 

Grey, sb., Grey, Richard of, 227, 6. 
grey the, adv., ON. grei^r, adj. ; 

readily, excellently, 125, 9. 
greype(n), see grei] 3 e(n). 
griat, grihond, see grft, gryhond. 
grill, gryl, adj., OE. *gril, cf, gnl- 
lan; harsh, fierce, 50, 5. 

grim, grym, adj., OE. grim ; grim, 
cruel, 89, 20. 

Grim, sb., OE. Grim? ; Grim, 81, 2. 
Grimesbi, sb., ON. OE. Grim + ON. 
b7, ‘ town Grimsby {Lincolnshire) , 
87, 30. 

grimli, adj., OE. grimlic ; grim, fear- 
ful, 148, 23. 

grin, sb., OE. grin; snare \ lof and 
grin, some instrument or instru- 
ments of torture, 3, 14. 

grinde(n), stv. , OE. grindan (grindan) 
-grand (grgnd) (3); grind-, inf. 
grinden, 200, 8; pr. 3 sg. griat 
(Sth.), 200, 10 ; pr. sbj.pl. grinden, 
200, 12; pt. sg. grunde, 195, 12; 
pt. sbj. sg. grunde, aoo, 8. 
grinst9n, sb., OE. *gxind, grindstan ; 

grindstone, 200, 10. 
grip, sb., ON. gripr ; raven, vulture, 
82, 16, 

grisTbittyng, sb., OE. gristbitung, ; 
gnctshing cf teeth,. ^24^, 15, 


grise, sb., OM. *grys, cf. OE. gryslic; 
horror, fear. 

grise (n), stv., OE. (a)grisan-gras (i)^ 
feel horror, terrify ; inf. grise, 
54, 20. 

grisli, grisly, adj., OE. gi-yslic^; 
horrible, grisly, 150, 22 ; grisly, 
237, 17. Sth. grislich, 182, 12. 
grisliehe, adv., Sth. = Ml.^ grisli ; 
OE. grislice; horribly, grisly, 61, 
13 * 

grispatie(n), wkv., Sth.s=Ml, gns- 
pate(n) (baten) ; OE. gristbatian 
gnash the teeth; inf. grispatien, 
i 95 » 13 - 

grip, grith, sb., OE. gri?y ; peace, 
security, 50, ii ; grith, 80, 18. 
griSfulnesse, sb , based on OE. gri '5 ; 

peacefulness, security, 202, 30. 
grocehyng, sb., based on OF. grou- 
drier ; grudging, wrong, 233, 26. 
grome, sb., eME. — ME. grpme ; OE. 

grama, grpma; anger, 193, 8, 
grpneCn), wkv., OE. granian ; groan, 
inf. grpn, 267. 

grpt, sb., ON. gratr; weeping, 29, i. 
grpte, sh., OE. grot, neut . ; particle, 
piece, 61, 18; pi. grptes, 79, li. 
grpve, earlier grpf, sb., OE, graf, 
7 ieut. ; grove, 241, 33. 
growe(n), stv., OE. growan-greow 
(R); grow; pt. sg. grew, 36, 3. 
"Nth.. pr. ppl., groTiand, 15 1, 3. 
gruchche(n;, wkv., OF. grouchier; 
niurmur, grudge; pt. pi. gruch- 
chede hi, 212, 18. 

griind, sb., OE. grund, grund ; bottom, 
ground, 19, 25 ; ds. grunde, 20, 
II. Sth. ds. (Lay.) grunden, i8i, 
24. 

grunde, see grinde(n). 
grundlike, adv., OE. *grundlice, 
grundlice; ravenously, 84, 31. 
grundwall, sb., OAng. grand wall, 
grundwall, WS. -weall; founda- 
tion, 130, 12, 

gryhond, grihond, sb., Kt. — Ml. 
graihimd; OY,. greyhound, 219, 21; 
grihond, 219, 23. 
gryl, grym, see grill, grim, 
gii, gudo, see pu, god. 



GLOSSARY 


378 


giilden, adj., Sth. = MU gilden ; OE. 

gylden j golden ; /s, giildene, 182,13. 
gialte(n), Sth. = Ml. gilte(n) ; 
OE. gyltan ; sm^ incur guilt ; pr. 3 
sg, giiltet, 179, 2. 

gun, gunen, see girLne(n). 
gungest, see 5ung. 
gunnen, see ginne(n). 

guo, see g9(n). 
guod, gur, see god, 

g'upd6(n), •vokv,, Sth. = Ml. girde(n) ; 

OE.gyrdan ; gird ; pp. igurd, 207, 2. 
gu’Shfde, sh.i OM. gngoShad (*h^d, 
yi?), WS. geogo^Shad ; youth, 15, 10. 
guyldehalXe, sb., ON. gildi + ME. 

halle; gild hall^ guildhall, 233, 16. 
gyde, sb,, OF. guide, ON. gide; 

guide, loS, 13. 
gyfe, gyffe, see give(n). 
gylde, sb., ON. gildi, cogn. with OM. 

geld, WS. gield; guild, 116, 18. 
gyldeday, sb., ON. gildi + OE. dseg ; 
giiildday, day of the guilds meeting, 
lit, 21, 

gylty, adj . , OE. gyltig ; guilty, 107, 4. 
gynne, see §in. 

gysel, sb„ OE. gisel ; hostage*, pi, 
gysles, 6, 20. 

gyteme, OF. guiterne, AN, 
giteme ; guitar, 237, 10. 
gyve, sb,, OM. gifu, WS. giefu mod. 

byON.?;^^//, 75, 19. 
gyre(n), see give(2i), 5eve(n). 


H. 

ha, seeh.B>'V6(n), he. 
ha, interj., OE. ha; ha, 102, 12. 
habb, habbe(n), habbet, habbej?, 
habej), see have(n). 
habitacion, sb,, OF, habitacion; 

habitation, 239, 27. 
had, sb., eME., Nth. for ME. hgd ; 
OE. had ; condition, quality, rank, 
8 , 17.’ 

hSlde(ii),'zy)5z'., eSth.«Ml, hSde(n); 
OM. heldan, heldan, WS. hieldan^ 
(hyldan) ; incline, tip, heel\ inf* 
h^lden, 181, 24; pt^sg^hm^A, 181, 
24. 


hsele'S, sb,, OE. hseletJ; hero, man, 
•warrior*, g. pl* hoele^Je, 188, 6, 
heerm, see harm. 

hSrue, sb., ON. hjami; brain*, pL 
h^rnes, 3, 9. 

hmpeli^, adv,, ON. hasjjiliga ; scorn- 
fully, contemptuously, 9, 26. 
hffived, hafd, see hfved, 
haf, hafden, hafe, hafiEdeun, see 
have(ii). 

hafved, see hfved. 

hai, sb., OM. heg, WS. hieg; hay, 

3- 

hail(l), hal, adj., eME., Nth. = Ml. 
hfl; whole-, haill, 175, 10; hal, 

i79j 25 * 

halde(n), stv., eME., Nth. *= Ml. 
h§lde(nj ; OAng. haldan (WS. 
healdan^heold (R) ; hold, keep*, 
inf, hMen, 6, 4; (Nth.) halde, 
144, 6; yr. 3 sg, (Nth.) haldes, 
128, 25; imp. sg. hald, 190, 24; 
imp, pi, (Nth.) haldis, I70j 5 > P* 
sg, heold, 4, 10; held, 155, 30; 
hild (Nth,), 131, 32 : pt.pl, heolden, 
2, 29 ; pp, halden, 128, i. Kt.yr. 
3 sg, halt, 214, 23. Cf. h9lde(n). 
halechen, see hali. 
halecheXn), see hal5he(:a), 
haleweise, sb., OE. *h»lewSge, cf. 
ON. heilivagr ; balsain, literally 
health hringer, 190, 29. 
halewen, halewyn, see hali. 
haley, cdv,, OE. hal + 1^; wholly, 
^ 7 - 

half, halve, halven, adj., OM. half, 
WS. healf; half, 4, n ; halve ; side, 
60, 13; halven, 58, 8. 
half, sb., OE. healf; half, side, 185, 20. 
hal^he(iL), halwe(n), uuhi., OE. 
halgian; hallow, consecrate*, inf. 
hall^herm (O), ii, 22 ; pt. sg. 
(eME.) halechede, 2, 9; halwede, 
205, 9, Nth. pr, sbj, sg. halowe, 
146, 14 ; pr. sbj. pi. halowe, 146, 
23 ; pp. haloud, 139, 23. 
hali, adj., eME., Nth. « Ml. hfli; 
OE. halig; hply,pl, saints*, eME. 
hall, 5, i; hali5 (O), 12, 13; 
halljhe (0), 8, 19; pi. halechen, 
4, 8; hamen, 197, i ; halwen, 117, 



GLOSSARY 


379 


3; halewyn, 116, 16; halewen, 
228, 28. Nth, h^y, 146, 19. 
h^Kdom, halydom, s^., OE. halig- 
dom ; saintly relic ^ sacrament^ 6, 
20 ; halyddm, 90, 1 7. 

Halidon, sh.^ Halidon^ 157, 10. 
hali^, see hali. 

halle, sb.^ OE. heallj/I; hall^ 49, 2. 
hallerof, sb.^ OE, heall + lof; hall- 
roof^ roof of the hall^ iSt, 2^. 
haU3he, see haK. 
haloTid, halowe, see hal3he(n). 
halpe, see h©lpe(ii), 
halpeny, sb,^ OE. healf pening ; half 
pe 7 iny, MnE, halpeny, 117, 4. 
halSj sb,, OM, hals, WS. heals ; neck, 
3 , 17- 

halse(n), wku. Nth. = Ml. halse(n) ; 
OE. halsian ; conjure, adjttre\ 
salute ; pt, sg. halsit, 169, 30. 
halsing, sh,, OE. halsiing,y. ; saluta- 
tion, 169, 31. 

halt, adj,, OE. halt, healt ; halt, 
lame ; pi. halte, 81, 18. 
halt, see halde(ii). 
halve, halven, see half, 
halwen, see hall. 
halwe(n), see hal3h0(3i). 
haly, see hali. 

halydaye, sb,, Nlh. = Ml. hglidai ; 
OE. haligdaeg; holy day, holiday, 

146, 14- 

halydom, ham, see halidom, he. 

ham, adv., ©ME., Nth., Ml. h^m; 
OE. ham ; home (Scot, hame), 8, 7. 

hamme, sb., OE. hamm., f. ; ham, 
inner or bcuk part of knee, 223, 23. 
Hamtun(-6n), sb., OE. HamtOn ; 
Southampton^ 163, 23. Sth. ds. 
Hamtone, 188, 5. 
hamzelve, see self. 

han, see hav©(n). 

haoid, sb,. Nth. « ML, Sth. hgnd 
(hand) ; ONth. hand, hand ; hand, 
126, 7, Nth. pi. Lend < ON. 
hendr, 138, 19. eSth. ds. hande, 
178, 24- 

h&nde'werc, sb., OE. handgeweorc 
handiwork, 130, 18. 
h?widle(n), wkv., OE. handlian; 
handle \ inf, handlen, 36, 2, 


hange(ii), h9nge(n), wkv., OE. 
hangian ; hang ; inf. hgnge, 242, 
37. Nth. inf. hang, 13S, 18 ; pt. 
sg. hanged, 139, 30; pp. h^ged, 
136, 16; hanget, 138, 30. 
hap, sb., ON. happ ; fortune, hap, 
90, 4. 

happe(n), wkv., ON. happa; to come 
abozet, happezi j pt. sg. happed, 343, 
24. 

Harald, sb., OE. Harold < ON, 
Haraldr; Harold, soft of Godwin, 
203, 22. 

hard, adj., OE. heaid ; hard, difficult, 
21, 18. 

harde, adv., OM. harde, WS.hearde ; 

hard, cruelly, 21, 4. 
hardi, hard! (hardy), adj., OF. hard! ; 

hardy, hold, 23, 25. 
hardliohe, adv., OE. heardlice; 

sorely, stoutly, hardly, i8r, 20. 
hardn.e(n), wkv., OE. *heardnian; 
become hard, harden', pr. sbj. sg. 
harden, 103, 5, 

hare, see he, here. 

hare, sb., OE. hara ; hare, 219, 21. 
hare(n), wkv., OE. hergian ; harry, 
plunder, lay waste, pf sg. hared, 
132, 22. 

harm, sb., OE. harm, hearm ; harfit ; 
ds. harme, 29, 26. eSth. ds. 
hsenne, 185, 30. Sth. herm, 202, 
33 - 

harme(iL), Sth. harmi©(n), herm- 
ie(ii), wko.y OE. haiiaian ; Harm ; 
irf. harmen, 195, 3. Sth. inf. 
barmy e, 222, 14; pr. pt. harmej), 
195, 4 ; pr. sbj. sg. hermle, 203, 2. 
harpe, OE. hearpe ; harp^ 237, 10. 
harryng, sb., imitative word ? ; snarl- 
ing, 324, 15. 

hasard, sb., OF. hasard*; hazard, a 
game at dice, 337, 8. 
hasarddur, sb., OF. hasardonr ; 

gaffibler, player at hazard, 241, 32. 
hasardxye, sb., OF, hasardrie; gam- 
bling, 246, 4. 

haspe, sb., OE. hxpse; hctsp, clasp, 

61, 7. 

hast(e), sb,, OF, hseste ; haste ; hast, 
120, 4, 



GLOSSAjRY 


380 

h&stili, hastily, adtf,^ OF, hastif+ 
ME. IT; hastily^ 138, 23. 

Hastinge, sb,, OE. Hsestinga 
(ceaster) ; Hastings^ 205, 18. 

hastly, ddv,, OE. haste + ME. ly; 
hastily y 94, 7. 

hat, adj,^ eME. ITth. = Ml. hgt; 
OE. hat; hot^ 195, 15. 

hateden, see h.atie(n). 

liate(n), eME., ITth. = Ml. 

h9te(n) ; OE. hatan-het (heht) (R) ; 
callj com^nand, pro7nise ; pt. sg* het, 
41. 2 ; hehte, 186, 9 ; hight, 141, 
18; hiht, 154, 21; hae, 189, 13; 
pp. (eSth.) ihate, 191, 13. 

hap, see have(iL). 

hatie(rL), wkv,, Sth. = Ml. hate(n) ; 
OE. hatian; hate\ inf. hatye, 218, 
26; pr, pi. hatlep, 214, 18; pi.pl. 
hateden, 216, 17. 

hatre, sh.^ OE. hsetem, pi. of ^hset ; 
garments^ clothes ; double pi. hatren, 
89, 3- 

hatte, def v., only relic of Teut. 
passive \ OE. hatte-hatton; is called ^ 
is named ; was called, was named ; 
pt. sg. hatte, 5, 4; pt. sg. hyght, 
95, 17; het, 307, 25. 

hatterlzeli©, hetterliche, adv,, based 
on dial. Eng. hetter, * quick, eager,’ 
cf. MLG. hetter ; quickly, 194, 19. 

hauiit©(n), wkv.,0'^. haunter; haunt, 
practise \ pt.pl. haunteden, 337, 8. 

Havelok, sb., cf. note; Havelok, *i*j, 
13* 

liave(n), eME. haven, wkv., OE. 
habban-hasfde; have, possess; inf. 
haven, 5, 22; hafeim (O), 8, 16; 
haven, 18, 13; ban, 340, 29; pr. 

1 sg. (eME. hafe, 8. 18) ; pr. 

2 sg. havest, 18, i; hast, 52, 10; 

haves, 86, 4; ppr. 3 sg. (eME. 
hafepj) (O), 8, 20) havetS, 14, 8; 
iaf, 37, 1 ; hath, 114, 30; //. 

haven, 26, 10; have ge, 29, 27; 
han, 70, 6 ; pr. shj. sg. have, 18, 
28 ; imp. sg., 43, 15 ; ha, loi, 27; 
pt. sg. hadde, 2, 20; hefde, 5, 30; 
hedde, 7, 7; haved, 56, 22; hade, 
72, 20; had, 90, 16; pr. 2 s^. 
haddist, 55, 13; pt. pi. hadden, 


2, 28 ; hefden, 3, 2 ; hafden, 4, 21 ; 
hsefden, 6, 33 ; haffdenn (O), 12, i ; 
pt. sbj. sg. hade, lo3, 20 ; pt. sbf. 
pi. hadde, 243, 19; pp. had, 56, 18. 
ITth. inf. ha, 134, 30 ; pr. 2 sg. 
havis, 153, 39; haves, 86, 4; pr. 
pi. have, 129, 10; hafe, 144, 9. 
Sth. (SEMI.) inf habbe, 177, 15 ; 
pr. I sg. habbe, 176, 3 ; habb, 176, 
5 ; /r. 2 sg. best, 216, 6 ; pr. 3 sg, 
'(eSth. have®, 177, 16; heftf, 178, 
10; haf?i, 179, 28; hep, 216, 7; 
hafe??, 183, 18); pr. pi. *(eSth. 
habbep, 177, 12; habbet, 179, 12; 
habbeo’S, 190, 24) ; habbep, 309, 7 ; 
habep, 2x3, 31 ; /n sbj.pl. habben, 
303, 12; pt. pi. hedde, 177, 27, 
'SLt.pp. iheed, 213, 19. 
havene, eME. havene, sb., OE. 
hsefen,/. ; haven; havene, 186, 11 ; 
havene, 205, pi. havenes, 235, 
33* 

Haverford, sb., OE. Haverford (in 
Pembroke), 223, 5. 
haves, see have(iL). 
havyng, sb., based on have(n) ; 

behaviour, 170, 17. 
hawe, sb., OE. haga, hedge, enclosure, 
meadow, 244, 27. 

hawkyng(e), pi\ ppl. as sb., ME. 
hauken, based on OE. hafoc, 
^hawk*; hawking, 120, 21. 
haxte, see he^. , 

hayl, adj., ON. heil; well, sotind; 

later in salutation, 139, 32. 
he, hee, pm. mass., OE. he ; he, i, 
2 ; hee, 108, 3 ; dat.-acc. him, i, 9 ; 
himm (O), 10, 4; hym, 89, 19; 
he’t = he it, 10, 4. ITth. he, 126, 
18; dat.-acc. hym, 127, 10. Sth. 
he, 176, 14 ; ha, 2x1, 17 ; dat.-acc. 
him, 176, 14; acc. hine, 181, 10; 
h3me, 219, 22. 

heo, ghe (he), ha, pm. fern., 
OE. heo ; she, 36, 16 ; ghe, 24, 21 ; 
he (SEMI.), 40, 30, footnote ; dai.^ 
acc. hire, 5? 32 ; hir, 64, ii ; hur, 
106, 13. Later sche, q.v. Nth. 
scho; dot. -cue. here, 126, 18; hir, 
128, 10. Sth. heo (eSth.), i8x, 33; 
ha, 192, 19; dat.-acc.\dxei, 188, 23; 



GLOSSARY 


381 


hare, 197, 4 ; as. (eSth.) heo^ 182, 
7 : ha. 192, 19. 

sclie, p'n. fem,^ OE. seo ; she, 
64, 12 ; eME. sc», 5, 32 5 scho, 128, 
10. 

it, prn. neuL, OE. hit; it, i, 8; 
itt (O), 8, 21 ; hit, 36, 3 ; hyt, 88, 
13. ITth. hit, 128, 5; it, 128,6; 
yt, 162, 6. Sth. hit, 176, 13 ; it, 
^77» 3° 5 (with expletive force), 
there, 79, i. 

hi (hii), he, a, is, pm. pL, OE. 
hIe,heo, hi; they, 2, 16; hii, 102, 25 ; 
he, 19, 12 ; 23, 13; 60, 17; 

gpl. here, 31, 4; her, 28, 2; dat.- 
acc, (eME.heom, 2, 16), hemm (O), 
9, 13 ; is = his (hes), 14, 6. ITth. 
pai, see ])ey. Sth. heo, 182, 9 : 
hi (hy), 176, 22; hii, 203, 20; 
dat.-acc. (eSth.), heom, 183, 9; 
ham, 191, 17 ; horn, 204, 22 ; hem, 
212, 8. apl. hi, 212, 5 ; apl. is, 177, 
31; his, 212, 19; hise, 216, 7; a, 
221, 6. 

hfalde(ii), see h§lde(n). 
hfale, sb., eSth. = Ml. hfle ; OE. 
hffilu, hSle ; health, safety ; to 
wratSer hfale, to {her) bad health, 

I93» 7-’ 

hfate(n), wkv., eSth. = Ml. hfte(n) ; 

OE. hmtan ; heat’, htf. 195, 15. 
hfavet, see hfved. 
hechele, sb., OE. *hecele ; hetchel, 
heckel, 61, 17. 
hedde, see have^n). 
hede, sb., OE. *hede, cf. hedan, ‘to 
heed'; heed, care, 70, 22. 
hede(ii), wkv., OE. hedan ; heed, 
guard*, inf, heden, 192, 28, 
hederto, ad'u., OE. hider + to ; 

hitherto, 223, 28. 
hee, see he, he^. 

heele « hole, sb., OE. hela ; heel, 
235,8. 

heer, heere, see her, here(3i). 
heeste (hefden), see heste, have(rL). 
heet, see h9te(n). 

hefde(n), wlw., OE. (bi“)heafdian ; 

behead*, pt. sg. hefdid, 131, 26. 
hffed, see heved. 
hefEae, hefo, see heven, have(ii). 


hd5, heg, hey, hy, adj., OM. hSi, 
WS. heah; high*, heg, 14, 14; 
hey, 62, 23 j heyse, 48, 14; hye, 
108, 28; comp, heyer, 151, 18; 
superl. hegest, 24, 14 ; hejeste, 39, 
18 ; heis, 231, 24; heigh, 242, 24. 
Nth. hee, 169, 23; high, 139, 21. 
Sth. h|5, 190, 6 ; heh, 192, 6 ; hey, 
20S, 3 ; fds. (eSlh.) hfsere, 187, 20 ; 
superl. hexte, 184, 12; haxte, 184, 
26. 

he3e(n), heye(ix), wkv., OM. *hegan, 
WS. hean for *hien; raise high, 
exalt*, pp. heyed, 74, 18. Sth. 
ppl. heinde, 192, 4; pt. sg. hehede, 
196, 22 ; pp. iheiet, 197, ii. 
he^ere, see he3. 

healice, heglice, hehlice, adv., OM. 
hehlice, WS. heahlice ; highly, with 
honor ; heglice, 5, 2 ; hehlice, 8, 4. 
Kt. hejliche, 217, 17. 
he3te, he3t, sb., OM. hehtSo, WS. 
heahtJo; height*, he5t, 104, 27. 
13*th. heyt, 15 1, 21. 
heh, hehlice, see hej, heglice. 
hehede, see he3e(n). 
hehreve, sb., OM. hehgerefa, WS. 
heahgerefa; higkreeve, prefect, 192, 
22. 

hehte, see hate(n). 

h0i3, heigh, see he^. 

hei4 adj., ON. heill, cognate OE. 

hsel [hal] ; whole, well, 15, 30. 
heild, wko., INTth. = Ml. helde(n) ; 
OAng. heldan, heldan ; incline, 
incline to ; pr. pL heild, 134, 17. 
heilnesse, sb., OM. heil + OE. ness,j^. ; 

happiness, joy, 22, 4. 
heinde, heir, see he3e(n), her. 
heir, sb., OF. heir; heir, 72, 5 ; eir, 
83, 19. 

heiward, sb., OE. hege + weard; 
hayward, guardian of the hedge, 
farm bailiff, 202, 32. 
held, see halde(n), h9lde(iL). 
helde(ii), wkv., OM. heldan, heldan, 
WS. hieldan; incline, incline to*, 
inf. helden, 17, 28 ; pr. pi. helden, 
1 1 6, 21 ; pr^ sbj. pi. helde we, 
18, 31. 

belden, hele, see belle. 



OLOSSARY 


383 


Ilf le, sb. , OE. ; healthy salvation, 

137, 22. 

lifle(n^, stv,, OE. helan-h^l (5); 
conceal\ inf, h|le, no, 8 ; pr, i sg. 
h|le, 38, 21. eSth. inf. heolen, 
192, 33 ; PP- libeled, 199, 32. 
h^le(n), wkv., OE. hselan ; heal ; fr. 
3 sg. h|lej), 104, 17 ; ft. sg. hfled, 
132, 9. 

helere, sb,, Kt. == Ml. li|l§re ; based 
on OE. hselan; healer, 211, 17. 
lifle]?, J‘^6lifle(iL). 

Heiaed, sb., cf. note ; Helfled, 77, 14. 
Iifl 5 e(n), whi}., Sth.. = Ml. h|le(n); 
OE. helian; conceal, cover, protect', 
pp. ihfled, 199, 32. 

EeUo, sb., OE. hell,/.; hell, ii, 8 ; 
liele,_i25, 32. 

helleliound, sb., OE. hellehund, 
-hund ; hell hound, dog of hell, 58,11. 
hellepine, sb., OE. helle + pin, /. ; 

punishment of hell, 77, 8. 
hellewa, eME, for hellewf, sb., 
OE. hell + wa; woe of hell, ii, 30. 
hellewel, OE. helle + wel; dbyss 
of hell, 63, 24, 

helm, sb., OE. helm; helm, 61, 9. 
Sth. ds. helme, 227, 18 ; pi. helmen 
(Lay.), 189, 28. 

helpe, sb., OE. helpe; help, 6, 33; 
hellpe (O), 8, 25, 

helpejn), stv., OE. helpan-healp (3) ; 
help', inf helpe, 35, 17; pr. sbj. 
sg. helpe, 226, 14; imp. sg. help, 
18, 7 ; pt. sg. halpe, 92, 10 ; help 
(SEMI.), 45, 25; hollpenn (O), 
10, 26. ikt'h.pr. 3 sg. helps, 128, 
23 . Sth. //. helpe'S, 195, 4; 
pr.sbj.pl. (eSth.) heolpen, 187, 20. 
helping, sb., based on helpe (n); 

helping, aid, 129, 25. 
helps, see helpe(n). 
helde, sb., OE. h^lj)e ; health, safety, 
salvation, 30, 24. 

Hely, sb., Lat. (Vnlg.) Heli; Eli, 
the priest, 220,1. Of. My. 

hem, fhemm), see he, 
hemself, hemselfe, see self. 

hen, hend, see henne, hand, 
hende, adj., OE. gehende (-hende) 

[hand] ; near, ready, prompt. 


gracious, 36, 31 ; as Je hende, as 
the gracious one, graciously, gently, 
204,*!; stiperl.'khx^QsX, 1S4, 4. 
hendi, ^j. OE. hendig ; handy, apt, 
courteous, 202, 21. 

henge(n), wkv., ON. hen_gia ; hang, 
cause to hang; pt. pi. henged, 3, 6. 
Nth. inf. hing, 140, 22. 
hengen, see h6(ii). 
henne, hen, sh., OE. henn, f . ; hen, 
86, 18. Sth. hen, 198, 20; gs. 
henne, 198, 20. 

henne, hennes, adv., OE. lieonon, 
infl. by adverbs in -es ; hence, 239, 
25 ; hennes, 123, 22. 

Henri, Henry, sb., OF. Henri ; 
Henry', Henry I, i, i; Henry, the 
abbot, I, I ; Henry, 223, 3. 
henten, wkv., OE. hentan ; pursue, 
ccdch, seize; i^.h.GrAo, 240, 14; pt. 
sg. hente, 90, 7; pp. hent, 61, 23. 
Sth. pp. yhent, 245, 7. 
heo, heom, see he. 
hSold, heolde(n), see halde(n), 
hglde(n). 

heolen, see hfle(n). 
heolpen, see helpe(n). 
heordemon, sb., eSth. = Ml. herde- 
man; OE. heord,/ + man; herds- 
man ; eSth, gpl. heordemonne, 
202, 32. 

heore, heorte, see here, herte. 
heortelich(e), adv., OE. ’''heortelice ; 

heartily, 196, 15. 
heou, heovene, see hu, hevene. 
heovenlich, see hevenlioh. 
hfp, sb., OE. h^p ; heap ; ds. hgpe, 
36, 18. 

her, see hire. 

her, sb., OM. her, WS. h^r; hair, 63, 
25. 

her, heer, adj. conj., OE. her; here, 
6,22; heer, 239, 6; heere, 243, 15; 
her befgren ; before this, already, 
in respect to this, 24, 5. INth. 

■ heir = her, 166, 10. Kt. hyer, 
21S, I. 

herhorn, sb., ON. herbergi ; harbor, 
place of shelter, 87, 27. 
hertoorwe(n), wkv., ON. herbergja; 
harbor, shelter ; pp. herborwed, 87, 
27. 



GLOSSARY 


3S3 


hercnie(2i), Sth. na Ml. herk- 

ne(n); OE. hercnian, heorcnian; 
hearken ; pr. sbj\ pL hercnen, 200, 
12 ; mtp, pL hercneS, 198, i. 
herde, sb,, OE. heord, heord,/. ; herd, 
88, 5. 

berde, sb., OE. heorde ; tow, hards, or 
refuse flax in pi, 142, 8. 
berde, see bere(n). 
bere, ber, pers, pr 7 t,, based on OE. 
//. hiora, heora ; their \ her, 2, 
15 ; here, 2, 14 ; (eME. heore, 5, 
26). ITtb. ]jaire, ])are, ])er, see 
}je55re. Stb. heore (eSth.), 179, 
12; hare, 197,4; hore, 199,6; hor, 
204, 22 ; here, 220, 5. 
bfre, sb,, OE. here; army, war, 35, i. 
here, here, see be, here(rL). 
hereafter, herefter, adv., OE. her 
+ sefter ; hereafter, 70, 5 ; herefter, 

berede, see h§re(xL). 
berekempe, sb., OE. *hereceinpa; 
warrior', Sth._^/. herekempen, 185, 


29. 

beremarke, sb,, OE. here + mearc,j^ ; 
sta 7 idard of the army ; Stb. pi. 
heremarken, 189, 27. 
bfre(n), Sth. berie(n), wkv., OE. 
herian; praise', inf. h|re, 61, 9; 
Stb. pp. yherd, 74, 18. eSth. pr. 
ppl. heriende, 192, 4; //. .f^. herede, 
195; 25 ; pp. iheret, 197, ii. 
bere(ii), wko}., OM. heran, WS. 
hleran; hear-, inf. herenn (O), 10, 
i; here, 52, 27; heere, 237, 17; 
pr. sbj. sg. here, 14, i ; imp. pi- 
here?S, 15, 16; pt.s^. herde, 6, 27 ; 


, herde, 21, 17. 

bere(rL), wkv., Kt. = Ml. hlre(n) ; OE. 
hyran ; kire\ inf. here, 212, 3 ; pt. 
hMe, 212, 9. 

bSreyn, adv., OE. her + in; herein, 


99 ; 14 - 

berien, ^<?^b§re(n}. 
heritage, sb., OF. heritage ; heritage', 
22X, 4. 

herke(n), whv^, OM. *hercian, cf. 
OE. hercnian, ‘ hearken ’ ; listen, 
hark ; inf. herk, 94, 10. 
herkiie(ii),«yifey., OE. hercnian, heorc- 


nian ; hearken ; imp, pi. herkneth, 
239 ; 34 - 

berm, see barm. 
bermie(n), see barme(n). 
bermite, sb,, OF. hermite ; hermit*, 
pi. hermites, 78, l. 
berne, see biirne. 

herne, sb., ON. hiami; brain', pi. 
hemes, 163, 32. 

Herode, Herod, sb., OF. Herod; 
Herod, 13I; I 5 * 

Eerodes, sb., Lat. Herodes ; Herod, 
23S, 6. 

herrte, see berte. 
berrunge (heninge), see beryng. 
berte, bert, sb., OE. heorte ; heart, 28, 
29; herrte (O), 10, 22; hert, 102, 
II. Ntb.//. hertys, 146, 10. eStb. 
heorte, 178, 18 ;//. herten, 219, 31. 
berteblood, sb., OE. heorte + bl6d: 

heart blood, 246, 9. 
bervest, sb., Stb. = Ml. harvest ; OE. 

hffirfest; harvest, 205, 11. 
beryng, berrunge, sb., based on 
here(n) ; hearing, 99, 2 ; herxtinge, 
197, ID, 

hgryyng, sb,, OE. herung; praise, 
T02, 20. 

bfse, best (bej)), j'fi5b|ste,bave(n). 
bfste (bffste), bfst, sb., OE. haes, 
possibly *h^ste,yi ; command, order, 
41, 4; hggste, '238, 8 ; hgst, 68, 18. 
eStb. h|se, 179, 2; hfste, 223, 4. 
be*t, bet (bete), see be, bate(n). 
bet, see batte. 

bfte, sb., OE, hseto; heat, 15, 27* 
Kt, hete, 212, 21. 

bete, wkv., ON. hKta<lhdeta ; cf. Id. 
h5ta, Scotch hoot ; threaten ; pr. 3 
sg. hetes, 161, 12. 
hep, see bave(n). 

hfthen, bfpen, udj,, OE. hsetSen, 
OHG. heiden ; heathen, 3, 30. Kt. 
he>en, 213, 10. 

hfSen, beiSen, bepen, adv., ON. 

hetJan; hence, 25, 28; hepen, 85, 31. 
bftbing, sb., ON. batying, f. ; scorn, 
contempt, 136, 33. 

adv., OE. hetelice; hatefully, 
spitefully, 227, 24.^ 
bette(n), beu, see b9te(n),bewi 



384 


GLOSSARY 


3 i§valy, ij:^27.,OE. hefiglice; heavily, 
172, 29. 

lifved, sb*, OE. heafod, neut, ; head, 
17, 23; cME. hgfed, 3, 7; hSved, 
3, 8 ; pL ii|ved, 207, 18. eStE. 
hafd, 182, 5 ; hafved, 183, 24; hfa- 
vet (eSth.), I96> 24. 

Eeveking, Eeveneking. 

Eeven, see hevene. 

Efve(n), OE. Kebban-hof (6); 
heave ^ transfer (eME.); pr. 
pL heven, 189, 27 ; pt. sg. bof, 181, 
14; Sth.pp. yhgve, 223, 5. 
hevenblys, sb., OE. heofon + bliss ; 
bliss of heaven, 128, 22 ; heveneblis, 
228, 23. 

hevene, Eeven, sh., OE. heofone, wf. 
heofon, m.', heaven, 15, 20; ds. 
heffne (O), 10, 28; heven, 74, 13; 
hevene, loi, 23 ; //. hevens, 102, 
24. lith. hevin, 140, 25. eSth. 
heovene, 177, 3. 

Eereneblis, see Eevenblys. 
Hevenekyng, Hevekiag, sb., OE. 
heofone + kyning ; jhling of Heaven, 
Lord, 92, 28. eSth, ds, Hevekinge, 
178, 7. 

heveiilicb, adf,, Sth. = Ml. hevenli ; 
OE. heofonllc; heavenly, 179, 7? 
heovenlTch, 19I, 26. 

Hevenlfverd, sb., OE. heofon + laf- 
ord; Lord of Heaven, 18, 28. 
hevenriche, heveriche, sb,, OE. 
heafonrice ; kingdom of heaven, 14, 
14; heveriche, 178, 9. 
hevens, see hevene. 
hfvidlfs, adj,, OE. heafodleas; head- 
less, 164, 32. 

hfvie, hevy, adj,, OE. hef g ; heavy ; 

as sb,, 35, 20 ; hev5?, 144, 21. 
IjLevin (hevyn), see hevene. 
lievU, see have(n). 
hevTOes, sb., OE. hefignes,/. ; heavi- 
ness, 144, 25. 

hew (heu), sb., OE. heow ; hue, 
color, 98, 16 ; hen, 37, 30. 
hewe(n), stv., OE. heawan-heow (R); 
hew, cut down \ inf. or ger. hewene, 
181, 20 ; pt.pl. hewe, 112, 23. 
heacte, see ho;. 

hey (hey^e) ,heyed, j^(?he3,he3e(n). 


heyer, see he;. 

heyre, sb,, OF. haire ; hair-shirt, 
hair-cloth, 241, 7. 
heyt, hexst, see he3te, he;, 
hi, hii, see he. 

hi, hicht, see hi;e, hy ;0(n), hi3t0(n). 
hid, hidde, see hide(n). 
bight, hiht, see hate(n). 
hid(e), OK h5?d,/. ; hide, skin; 

hid (for hide ?), 17, 13. 
hide(n), wkv., OK, hydan; hide, 
conceal ; inf hide, 158, 5 ; pt. sg. 
hidde, 36, 10; hydde, 98, 21; pp. 
hid, 29. 22; hidde, 234, 21 ; es 
noght at hide, it is not to be hidden, 
158, 5. Sth.//. yhidde, 236, 3. 

hider, hidere, adv., OE. hider; 

hither, 28, 26; hidere, 185, 30. 
hiderward, adv., OE. hiderweard; 

hitherward, hitherto, 233, 24. 
hidynge, sh., based on hide(n) ; 

hiding, hiding place, 233, 22. 
hie(n), wkv.,^ OE, higian; hasten, 
hie; pr. sbj.pl. hlen, 201, 13. 
hi3e, M, hy, sb,, cf. OE. higian; 

haste; mh. hi, 141, 19; hy, 166, 16. 
high, see he;. 

higtes(t), hiht, see hgte(n). 
hii, see he. 

hi;te(n), hichte(n), wkv. ? based on 
OE. heht < hatan ? ; promise, pr,, i 
sg. hicht, 1 71, 6. 

hii, Mile, hyll, OE. hyll, m., hylle, 
f. ; kill, 14, 14 ; ds. or old f. form 
hille, 14, I ; hyll, 157, 10. 

Mid, Mile, see halde(n), hil- 
Mm, Mmm, see he. 
himmsellfenn, see self, 
himselven (-seollfenn, -sulf, 
-siilve), see he, self. 

Mne, see he. 

hine, sb. , OE. hina, gpl. of hiwa ; ser- 
vant, domestic, one of the household; 
dial. Eng. hind, 83, 33 ; hyn, 51, 16. 
hing, hir (hire), see hengen, he, 
Mrd, see hired. 

Mrde,.s'<&., SEMI, or Sth. = MI. herd; 
WS. hierde, OM. herde, herde; 
shepherd, guardian, keeper, 15, 5, 
hirdeman, sh.. SEMI, or Sth. « Ml. 
herdeman ; WS. hierdeman, OM. 



GLOSSARY 385 


herdeman ; herdsman ; pi. hli de- 
men, 32, ir. 

hire, sb.^ OE. hire^ 164, 32. 

]iire,/<7w. prn.^ OE. fgs. hire; 

6, 7. Wih. hir, 129, 6. Cf. he. 
hired, r3., OE.hlrfd; courts retinue \ 
ds. hirede, 1S6, 5 ; hird, 192, 5. 
Mredman, sb,, OE. hlrfdmann ; one 
of the ho2isehold or court, retainer ; 
pi. hiredmen, 190, 6. 

Mrte(n), wlrv., OF. liurter ; hurt- 
fr. sbj. sg. hirt, 104, 7. 

his, hise, pos.prn., based on OE. gs. 
his ; his, 1,7; hiss (O), 12, 1 5 ; //. 
hise, 2, 25; hyse, 75, 17. 

hit, see he. 

hlaverd (-ord), ho, f^^lgverd, ’who. 
hoaten, hof, see h9te(n), h|ve(n). 
hdkerliche, adv., OE, ’•'hocorllce ; 

mockingly, scornfully, 194, 5. 
hgl, adj. , OE. hal ; whole, entire, 27, 
19. 

hdld^ adj., OE. hold; faithful, 
friendly', pi. h5kle, 226, 3. 
holde(n), stv., OM. haldan (haldan), 
WS. healdan-heold (R); hold, 
possess ; inf. hglden, 15, 4 ; pr. sbj. 
sg. hglde, 17, 24; /r. sbj.pL hglden, 
27, 12 ; imp.pl, hglde Be, 199, 21 ; 
pt. sg. (eME. heold, 4, 10); held, 2, 
12; pt. pi. (eME. heolden, 2, 29); 
helden, 2, 14; pp. hglden, 22, 12. 
ITth. eME. halde(n), q.v. eSth. 
mf. hfalden, 177, 31; pr. sbj. pi. 
hfalden, 226, 11. Sth. pr. pi. 
hglde)?, 222, 31; pt.pl. hUlde, 203, 
19; pp. ihglden, 198, 9. 
hgldynge, pr. ppl. as sb.y based on 
OM. haldan, haldan; holding, 125, 
I. 

hgli, hggly, adj., OE. halig ; holy, 
17, 28; hggly, 238, i. 
hollpenn, see helpe.n). 
holou^, adj., OE. holh, pi. holse; 

hollotv', pi. holouj, 223, 22. 
hLolpe(n), see helpe(n). 
hgi^oh, adv., Sth. «=M1. hglli; OE. 

hallice; wholly, 223, 26. 
hglylyoh, adv., OE. halig + lice; 

kolily, 218, 16. 
horn, see h^ 


hgm, sb., OE. ham; home, 24, 32; 
hgme, 98, 10. 

hgm, hggm, adv., OE. ham ; home, 
homeward, 28, 14; hggm, 242, 22. 
homage, sb., OF. homage ; homage, 
161, 24. 

hfmward, adv., OE. hamweard ; 
“ho^neward, 31, 24 ; ligm^ward, 

108, 3. ^ 

homycide, sb., OF. homicide ; homz~ 
cide, murder, 245, 32. 
h6(n), siv., OE. h5n-heng (R) ; 

hang* pt.pl. hengen, 3, 7. 
hond, see hiind. 

hgnd, sb., OE. hand, hgnd ; hand, 
21, 27 ; ds. hgnde, 37, 4 ; pi. hgnd. 
65, 26; hgndeng, 59, 18. Sth. pi. 
hgnden, iSi, 23. 

hgndhabbing, adj., OE. handhseb- 
bende, pp. as adj . ; having in hand 
{stolen property), red-handed, 42, 
30- 

hondred, see hundred. 
hgiidselle(n), OM.*handsellan 
-said*, cf. ON. handselja; promise, 
betroth', pp. ihgndsald, 192, 13. 
honeste, adj., OF. honeste; honest, 
120, 27 ; oneste, 219, 16. 
hguge, houger, see hange(2i), 
hunger. 

honorde, see honure(n'). 
honour, honten, see honur, hun- 
te^). 

honourd, honoure, see honure(n). 
honur, honour, sb., OF. honur(-our); 
honor, praise, pomp, 39, 17; honour, 
102, 25. 

honure(n),a;^., OF. honurer; honor*, 
inf. _honure, 136, 3 ; imp. sg. 
honoure, 146, 25 ; pp. honorde, 
138, 6; honourd, 139, 25. 
hony, adj., OE. Imnig; honey, 128, 
26. 

hggly, hggm, see hgli, hgm. 
hggr, hgr, adj., OE. har ; hoar, 241 , 14. 
hoord, see hord. 

hgpe, OE. hopa; hope, 16, 21. 
hgpe(n), 6th. h^pie(n), wko., OE. 
hopiari; hope', inf hgpen, 103, 24; 
hope, 103, 27. irth. i sg. hgp, 
156, ii; pt.pl. hgpid, J43, 18. Sth. 


C C 



GLOSSARY 


386 

pr,pL ligpie]), 213, 27; pr, sbj\ sg. 
hople (eSth.), 176, 24. 
hor, tiore, see here, 
herd, hoord, sh.^ OE. herd (herd) ; 
hoards 226, 21. Sth. ds^ horde, 
176, 12; hoord, 242, 12. 
horderwyce, sb,^ OE. Ii5rdere + wice, 
VJkf . ; office of treasurer^ treasurer^ 
ship ; old dat. sg. or pL 4, 21, Cf. 
wiken, 

horedom, hordom, sb., OE. hore, f. 
+ dom; aduUeiy., whoredom^ 42, 
16; hSrdom, 209, 17. 
horiing, sb.., OE. *horling, cf. horing ; 
adulterer., 179, 14. 

horn (horn), sb.., OE. horn, horn; 
horn, 57, 24. 

hoT8, sb.y OE. hors; horse, 01, 10; 
ds. horse, 48, 14; pL horsys, 107, 
14. Sth.//. horsen, 184, 27. 

hgse, sb., OE. hose; hose, trousers, 
229, 12. 

hoseli, hosle(n), see h6sle(n). 
hdselynge, sb., based on OE. huslian 
or hQsel, sb . ; houseling, administer- 
ing the eucharist, 122, 12, 
h6sle(ii), wkv., OE. huslian ; housel, 
administer eucharist ; pp. hosled, 
75, 26 j hoselet, 122, 2. Sth. inf 
hoseli, 206, 2i;pp. ihoseled, 121, 

31- 

host, sb., OF. hoiste mod. by host; 

host, bread of the sacrament, 122,14, 
hgst , sb., OF. host ; host, army, 167,31, 
hgt, adj., OE. hat; hot, 60, 18 ; superl. 
hgtest, 214, 5. 

hgteCn), stv., OE. hatan-het (R) ,* 
call, command, promise ; pt. sg. het, 
31, 13; pt. 2 sg, higtest, 17, 25; 
higtes, 2^-, pt. pi. hette, 61, i ; 
pp. hgten, 25, 25. larth. hate(n), 
q.v. Sth. pr. 3 sg. hgt, 214, 19; 
pt. sg. heet, 222, 26 ; pp, (SEMI.) 
jhgten, 32, 32 ; yhgten, 73, 28. 
h^ (how, hou5), 

hound, hous (houss), se^ hund, hus. 
houre, see ure. 

houve, sb., OE. hufe; cap, covering, 
for the head \ houve of glas, a cap 
of glass, i.e. something ridiculous or 
ineffective, 56, 14. 


hgve(n), wkv., MDu., MLG. hoven I ; 
tai'ry, hover \ pr. 3 sg. hgve^, 15, 
24; pr. pi. hgven, 19, 13; pt. sg. 
J^ved, 104, 15. 
how, see hu. 

Howel, sb., Howell, 184, 12. 
hows, howsele, see hus, huseL 
hu, hou (how), adv., OE. hu; how, 
9, ii; h^, 66, 25; how, 88, 20. 
e^h. heou, 185, 10; hwu, 202,9; 
J10U3, 224, 3. 

hude(n), wkv., Sth. *= Ml. hTde(n) ; 
OE. hydan ; hide-, pp. hiid, 178, 
21. 

Hugo, sb., OF. Hugo; Hugo, 4, 23. 
hmre, sb., Sth. = Ml. hire ; OE. hyr, 
f ; hire, 202, 32. 

hul, sb., Sth. = ML hyll ; OE. hyll ; 

hill, 208, 6. Cf. hil. 
hulde, see hglde(n). 

Humber, Humbre, sb., OE. Humbre, 
f or indcl . ; Humber river, 8 7, 1 8 ; 
eME. ^imbre, 185, 24. 
hund, hound, bond, sb., OE. Juind 
(hCnd) ; homid, dog, 167, 2 ; hound, 
48, 26; bond, 2x9, 25. 
hundereth, adj., ON. hnndra]), cogn. 
with OE, hundred; hundred, 164, 
26. Cf. hundred, 

hundred, hondred, adj., OE. hun- 
dred; hundred, 32, 17; hondred, 
220, 4. 

himdradffald, adj. eSth. *= Ml. 
hundredfold, WS. hundredfealde ; 
hufidredfold ; pi. hundredf|alde, 

177. 30. 

hundrethfald, sb., Nth. = ML, Sth. 
hundredfold ; ON. hundra]? + O Ang., 
fald, fald, WS. feald; hundredfold, 
129, 28. 

hunger (eME. hunger), honger, 
sb., OE. hunger; hu 7 iger, 3, 19; 
honger, 55, 16. 

hungre(n), wkv., ON, hungra, OE. 
hyngran; hunger, be hungry', pr. 
3 sg. hungreti, 19, 8 ; hungreth, 
78, 26 ; pt. sg. hungrede, 83, 2. 
hungri, adj., OE, hungrig; hungyy, 
24, 8, 

hunte, sb., OE. hunta; hunter, 14, 

17 - 



GLOSSARY 


387 


lni2ite(n), OE, huntian; hunt\ 
inf. hunten, 14, i ; honten, 62, 5 ; 
pi^’ 3 hunted, 198, 10. 
Himtendonescliire, sb., OE. Hun- 
tandunscir, f. \ Huntingdonshire, 
226, 3. 

huntynge, huntyng, sh., OE. hunt- 
hunting, 120, 21 \ huntyng, 

106,25. 

Eur, EErde, see Ee, Eure(n). 

Eure, sb.f OF. liure ; skull-cap, 229, 
10; gray cap, 229, 28. 

Eure(n), StE = Ml. here(n) ; 

WS. hieran (hyran), OM. heran; 
fear; pt. sg. hiirde, 203, 22. 

Eurne, so., Sth. = Ml. hirne (heme); 
OF, hyme; nook, corner, 204, 18; 
Kt. ? heme, 204, 8. 

Hurtford, sb., OE. Heorotford ; 
Hei-iford, 227, 3. 

Eurtynge, sb., iDased on OF. hurter; 

hurtiT^, hijury, 147, 4. 

Eus, Ecus (h 6 Ws 2 , sb,, OE. hQs; 
house, 4, hous, 89, 28 ; hows, 
125, 4; houss, 171, I. StE. ds, 
huse, 199, 10. 

Eujsband j 3 .,ON.hQsb 6 ndi ; husband, 
small farmer; pi. husband is. 171, 

I. 

Eusel, EowselOj sb., OE. hilsel; 

eucharist \ howsele, 123, 21. 
Eusewif, OE. huswif ; housewife, 
202, 7. 

Euslffdx, sb., OE. hus + hlSdije; lady 
of the house, mistress, 202, i. 
EuswifscEipe, sb., OE. *huswif 4- 
scipe ; management of a house, 201, 
25 - 

Euyre, sb,, WMl. = Ml. hire, Sth. 

hiire; OE. Eyi-jj*^; hire, 125, 17. 
Ewam, Ewan, Ewat, see wEa. 

Ewan, see wEanne. 

Ewarof, see wEero£ 

Ewatloke, adv., OE. hwsetllce ; 
quickly, speedily ; StE. comp, 
watloker, 204, 1 3. 

Ewatsf , adv. , OE. hwset + s« j what so, 
whatsoever, 189, 19. 

Ewenne, see wEenne. 

Ewer(e), see wEer. 

Ewerfore, see wEerf^re. 


Ewerinne, adv,, OM. Kt. hweiinne, 
WS. hw^rinne, wherein, 218, 7. 

Ewet, see wEo. 

Ewfte, sb,, eMB. = Ml. whfte; OE. 
hwate ; wheat, 200, 8. 

EwelSersf , see wEe'Sersf, 

Ewi, Ewil, Ewilem, see win, while, 
wEilem. 

Ewo (Ew9),Ewon,j^^wE6,wEanne. 

Ewa, EwiiccEe, see Eu, while. 
see Ei3e, Ee. 

Eyde(n), see Eide(n). 

Eyder, see Eider. 

Eye, Eyer, see Ee3, Eer. 

EygEt(e), j<?^Eate(n) , Eatte, h 9te(n) . 

hJ30(n), wkv., 0£. higian ; hasten, 
hie; inf. hj^e, 65, 12. Cf. hie(n). 

Eyll, see Eil. 

Eym, Eymself, see Ee, self. 

E^ (Eyne), Eyne, see hdne, Ee. 

Hyrtlingberi, sb,, Iriklingborough 
(Northampton), 4, 23. 

Eyse, Eyt, see Eis, Ee. 


I, 

I, i, see ic, in. 

lacob, sb,, Lat. lacobus, later dis- 
placed by OF. Jacob; Jacob, 24, 30. 
i»de, see gg(n\ 

iaf, (iafen, iaven), see 39ve(n). 
ibe, ibeon, see be(n). 
ib eaten, see bfte(n). 
ibfre, sb, StE. = Ml. here; OM. 
geberu, WS. gebseni ; bearing, 
conduct, noise, shout; pi. ibfren, 

ibet, ibild, see bete(n), bilde(n). 
iblende, see blende(n). 
ibgre (iboren), see bfre(n). 
ibroJjt, ibroEt, see bringeCn). 
ibr9ke(n), ibye, see brfke(n), be(n). 
io, i, idh, pm,, 0 _E. ic; I, 21, 23; 
icc (O), 8, 18; I, 3, 20; daU^acc. 
me, 8, 20; mee, 107, 12. StE. 
(SEMI.) ich, 36, 23; 181, 12. PI. 
we, 4, 9 ; dat^cc. us, 15,6; uss 
(O), II, 13; ous, 66, 5; gpl. ure, 
28, 6 ; dual, witt (O), we two, 8, 
16 ; dat.’Occ, unne (O), 8, 26. 


C C 2 



388 


GLOSSARY 


ioakcled, see ca!: 0 le(n). 
xoaste, see caste (n), 
ioh., iclept, see f ch., cleppe (n). 
ioluped, see clupie(n). 
ioiiawe(ii), siv., Si;3i.saeME., Nth.. 
3aia\ve(n), Ml. kn 9 we(n) ; OE. 
gecnawan-cneow (R) ; htow ; pr, 
3 sg". icnaweS, i8o, 15 ; icnawen, 
9* , 

icnowen, see knowe(n). 
ieome, see ctmie(3i). 
ieoren, icorneej see chdse(iL), 
icud, see cuj)8(n). 
icume(2i), see oume(n\ 
idel, sd.y OE. idel; idle7iess, vanity \ 
Idell (O), 9, 27. 

idel, ydill, ydul, ad/\j OE. idel; 
idle^ empty ^ 51, 8; ydill, 143, 23 5 

ydul, 125, 19- ■ ’ 

idfld, see dfle(3a). 

idslnesse, sb.^ OE. idelness,/.; idle- 
ness^ ioi, 16; ydillnes, 144, 2. 
idemd, idezaet, see deme(n). 
idihte, id5n(0), see di3te(3i), d6(n). 
idrunke, drmke(n). 
iSdsn, see £9(11), 
ientred, see entre(n). 
ifa, sh,^ eSth. =M1. fg, OE. gefah; 

foe', pL ifan, 196, 23. Cf. ifg. 
ifaren, j'^^f5.ra(iL). 
ifere, sb,, SEMI. Sth. Ml. fere; 

OE. gefera; companion, 37, 23. 
iflld, see fiHe(ii). 

ifo, sb., OE. gefah ; foe ; pL ifoan ~ 
ifgn, 226, 19, 
ifon, see foa. 

if6(n), stv., Sth. = Ml. io(n) ; OE. 
gefSn -feng (R) ; receive, take hack ; 
inf. ifo, 43, 24. 

ifuld, ifunde, see fulle(n), flade(n). 
igain, igaines, see ageia, ageines. 
igainsa-we, sb.,OZ, *ongegn + sagu ; 

gainsaying, contradiction, 153, 26. 
i5arket, see 5arkie(ii), 050. 
i3elde(ii), siv., OM. geldan (geldan), 
WS. gieldan-geald (3) ,* yield ; pt, 
sg. isflde, 206, 31. 
i^fte, i5inid, see 5ete(n)j 5erne(ii). 
i^iva, i39lde, see 5ive(^), 3jelde(n). 
igranted, see grante(ii)i 
igr&p, see igr£pa(n). 


igretinge, sk, OE. gegreting, /; 
greeting, 226, 3. 

igripe(n), stv., Sth. = Ml. gripe(n); 
OE. gegrlpan-grap (i) ; seize, grip, 
take hold of\ pr. sbj. igripe, 196, 2 ; 
eME.//. sg. igiap, 182, 4. 
igiird, see gurde(n). 
ihate(ii), see hate(n). 
ihfalde(ii),.r/«/., eSth. =eME.halden, 
Ml. hglden, WS. healdan-heold 
(R); hold, possess, keep', ihfal- 
den, 177, 32. 

iheed, iheiet, see have(n), h§5e(ii). 
ihfled, see hfle(n). 
iher8(ii), wkv., SEMI., Sth. for Ml. 
here(n) ; OM. geheran, WS. hleran 
(hyran) ; hear\ inf. ihere(n), 42, 
24 ; hnp. pi ihereji, 211,2^', pt.sg. 
iherde, 37, 19 ; pt.pl iherden, 187, 
7 ; pp. iherd, 37, 26. Kt. hnp. sg, 
yhyer, 216, 13. 
iheret, see hfre(n), 
ihierde, see ihi©re(n). 
ihi3re(n) = ihere(n), wkv., Kt. - Ml. 
hire(n) ; OE. gehyran j hire ; pi. sg. 
ihierde, 213, 6, 

‘ihplden, ihgndsS.ld, see h9lde(n), 
hgndselle(n). 
ihoseled, see h6sle(n). 
ihpten, see h9te(n). 
ihiiren, wkv., Sth. = Ml. ihe.'e(n) ; 
WS. gehieran (hyran) ; hear', inf 
ihUre, 203, 15 ; pr. 3 sg. Mr 15, 17S, 
33 ; fp. ihurd, 203, 17. 
liven, see 5©ve(n). 
ikenne (n) , wkv., Sth. = Ml, kenne(n) , 
OE. gecennan; learn, know, inf. 
ikennen, 189, 33. 
ikindled, see kindle(n). 
ikneu, see iknoVre(n). 
iknowe(n), stv., OE. geknawan 
-kneow (R) ; know \ pt. sg. ikneu, 

ikiaU, adj., OE. gecu?5 ; known, 48,15. 
il, see ill. 

ilsed, ililred, see lfde‘(n), If red. 
ilSrde, ilaht, see Ifre(n), laK3che(n). 
ilaste(n), wkv*, Sth. « Ml. laste(n); 
OE. gel^stas;^ endure, last, fulfil', 
pt. sg. ilaste, 208, 33; ylaste, 206, 


20. 



GLOSSARY 


389 


ilc, ilk, ych.©, adj,.^ OE. ilea, w., ilce, 
f, ; same^ 18; wk, yche, 88, ii ; 
ilke, 196, 25. Sth. ilche, 226, 

15- 

110, iloke, ilk, ilke, yche, prn.^ OE. 
ilc; each^ every, illc (O), 9, 20; 
ilk, 16, 17; ilke a, 61, 18; ilka, 

139. 24. 

ilfawed, adj, , Sth. = Ml. lewed ; OE. 
*gel&wed, l^wed ; unlearned^ lay ; 
MnE, /ezvd, 226, 3. 
ileid, ilenet, see leie(n), lene(ii). 
ileosed, ilfred, jtf^losi0(n), lgre(3l^. 
ilfste(n), OE. gel^stan; /as/, 

endure-, pL sg. ilfste, 38, i ; pr. 
pph ilfstinde, 226, 9. 
ilet, ilft, see lette(n), lete(n). 
ileve(n). vokv,, Sth. = Ml. leve(n^ ; 
OM. gelevan, WS.gelievan; believe, 
inf, ileve, 177, 25 ; /r. pi. ilevet5, 
180, 9. 

iliehe, adj\, Sth. = Ml. liche, like ; 

OE. gelice ; edtke, 178, 10, 
ilicnesse, sb., OE. gelicne?, f. ; like- 
ness, 196, 23. 

ilike, adv., OE. gelice; alike, 1 2 8, 
24 ; Ifle Hike, loyally, 12S, 25. 
ilimpe(n), siv , OE. gelirapan-lamp 
(Igmp) (3) ; happen ; pt. sg. ilomp. 
1S6, 6 ; pp. ilimpe, 1S3, i. 
ilk, ilke, see ilc. 

111, il, adj., ON. illr - ill, bad, evil ; 
il, 49, 22 ; wk. ille, 37, 19; pi. 
ylle, 88, 16. 

illc, see ilo. 

ille, adv.y ON. illr; badly, fo, 9, 
ilome, ilomp, see ^elome, ifiinpe(u), 
ilusd, imad, see ltlse(ii), irLake(xi). 
imeette, see imfte;xL). 
imaked, see iiiake(xL). 
imange, see omang. 
imfane, sb., OE. gem^^a ; company, 
196, 25. 

imelled, see meUe(n). 
imfne, adv., OE. gem^ne ; together, 
197, 17. 

imeJige(2i)j wkv., OE. mengan ; 
mingle, disturb, trouble ; pp. 
imenged, 190, i ; imeng « imengd, 
180, 22. 

imet, see iingte(»). 


im§t0(ii), wkv., Stli. = Ml. mae(n); 
OE. gemetan ; meet with, fnd, 
obtain ; inf. imeten, 180, ii. 
imfte(n),W/(’Z'.,OE. gemetan; appear 
in drea 7 ]i ; pL sg. 181, 13 ; 

pp. imet, 196, 17. 

iznmgbill, adj., OF. immoble, older 
-miieble, -moeble ; itnulovable, 147, 
24. 

in (inn, yn), i, ine, prep, adv., OM. 
in, WS. on (in) ; in, 1,8; inn (O), 
9, 2 ; I, 8, 14; ine, 197, M*, 
in, sb., OE. inn ; inn, public-hoitse, 
117, 26. 
inc, see pu. 

indifferent, adj., OF. indifferent; 

indifferent, unbiased, 235, 26. 
ine, ined, see in, nede(n). 
inempnet, see neinne(n). 
informaoion, sb., OF. information ; 

information, 235, 13. 
injeong, sb., OE. ingang-ggng; 

entrance, going m, 187, 8. 

Ingland, sb., Nth. = Ml., Sth. 
England (-Ignd), OE. Englaland ; 
England, 126, 8. 

Inglis, adj , Nth. - Ml. Sth. English ; 

OE. Englisc; English, 127, 6. 
inguoynge, sb., Et. =M 1 . in^inge; 
based on ing§n ; eni?'ance, ingoing, 
216, 32. 

inn, see in, pi-ep. 

innen, inne, adv., OE. inne, innan ; 

in, within, 3, 10 ; innen, 8, 
innocent, adj., OF. innocent ; inno- 
cent, I or, 15, 

innocent, adj. as sb., OF. innocent; 
child, innocent, 116, 16 ; //. inno- 
centys, 147, 6. . 

inntill, see intil. 
inn'warrdll^, see inwardli^. 
inoh, inog, inou^, ino-w, ynng, 
inogh, inohe, ynon, adj., OE. 
genoh(g); enough, 9, 5; 12, 15; 
onoh, 3, 15; inogr 17, 12; ynng, 
24, 28; inons, 50, 25;^ inow, 86^ 
22; inogh, I29f 14; inohe, 150, 
10; ynon, 205, 29; yno5» 218. 28. 
ynow, 226, 10 ; inose, 227, 7. 
inome, see nime(n). 
inou^, inow, inoh. 



390 


GLOSSARY 


12186561, sb^i OE, insegele ; seal\ pU 
innse55less (0), 12, 25. 
intil(l), Intel, adv, prep,^ OM. intil? 
cf. Swed. in till ; into, to\ inntill (O), 
8, 19; intel, 227, 9. ITth. intil 
150, 19; intill, 144, 22. 
into, prep, adv,, OM. in to, WS. 

on to ; into, unto, 4, 15. 
inume, inmnen, see niine(ii'). 
in'W'ardli5, inwar( 31 ie, adv,, OM. 
inwardlic, WS. inweardllc; ear- 
nestly, inwardly ; innwarrdllj (O), 
13, 27; inwardlie, 156, 8. Sth. 
inwardliclie, 198, 33. 
loneck, sb,, OF. Yonec; Yonech, 
127, I. 

losep, loseph., sb,, Lat. loseph; 
later displaced by OF. Joseph; 
Joseph, 21, 2; loseph, 23, 3, 
ipeynted, see peynte(n). 
ipli3te(3i), wh),, OE. *geplihtan; 
plight, engage, pledge ; pt, shj\ sg 
ipli5t, 204, II. 

ipricked, pp. as adj., OE. prician; 

pricked, clothed, adoi'ned, 48, 20. 
iqueden, irad, sec quf5e(n), rede(n). 
ire, yre, sb, OF. ire; ire, anger, 

5 ; s. 

irfadi, adj., OE. *ger«dig, cf. Swed. 

ledig; ready, prepared, 192, 32. 
ired, 5‘£^red©(n). 

Ireland, Irl^nd, sb,, OE. Iraland, 
-Ipnd; Ireland', dfj.jrelpnd, 227, 9; 
^Ignde, 188, 33 ; Yrlpnd, 220, ii; 
Yrloande, 226, 2. 

iren, yre, sb., OE, iren ; iron, 3, 16 ; 
yren, 165^ 2; spade ij), 34, 5; 
oSth. ds, yme, 227, 17. 
irere, sb,, OE, gerefa; prefect, 
steward, judge, reeve, 1 1 7, 26. 
irk, adj., ON. cf. Swed. yrka, 
‘ to urge ’ ; distasteful, irksome, 
. 150* 3 . _ 

irlpnd, see Ireland, 
irreverence, sb,, OF, irreverence; 

irreverence, 146, 3. 
is, isseh, see he, is©(ii). 
isah, see ise(n). 

isfieid, isset, see isei^e(n), sette(n). 
isauved, see save(n). 
isohende, see 8ohende(n). 


ischoten, see schdte(n). 
ischriven, ischryyen see schrive(n). 
isohriid, see schrude(n). 
ise, ise5, see ise(n). 
ise^§e(n), wkv., Sth, = Ml. seie(n); 
OE. geseegan-soegde (sffide) ; say ; 
pp, isseied, 183, 24; ised, 180, 19. 
iseghe, ise3e(n), iseh, isei, see 
ise(ii). 

iseid, iseyd, see s©ie(n). 
iseined, see sei]iie(n). 
ise(n), siv,, Sth. » Ml. se(n) ; OE. 
geseon-geseah (5) ; see, behold \ 
inf (eSth.) iseon, 176, 18 ; yse, 
65, 17; pr, pL iseofS, 199, 22 ; pr, 
sbj,sg. ise, 207, 20; pt, sg, ise5, 41, 
12; ysey, 205, 5; iseh, 181, 22; 
isseh (eSth.), 182, 17; isah, 182, 
12; isey, 62, 21; isei, 208, 21; 
ysey, 205, 5 ; pt, pL isfjen, 1 79, 9 ; 
pt, sbj pi, iseye, 205, 3 ; pp, iseghe, 
21 1, 9; ysen, 221, 7. Et. inf yzj, 
217, 11; pr, 2 sg, y2i5t, 217, 29; 
pr, 3 sg, yzy^h 216,8', yzye>, 217, 
I ; yzej), 217, 2. 
isent, see sende(n). 
iseon, iseotJ, see ise(n), 
iset, see sette(ii), 

isetnesse, sb., OE. gesetness,/! ; con- 
stitution, statute', pi. isetnesses, 
226, 12. 

iseyd, iseye, see s©ie(n), ise(n). 
isla5©n, see sl9(n). 
isgld, see selle(n). 
is9in, adj., OE. gesom ; miited, 
gathered, 185, 32. 
isomned, see soinnie(n). 
ispend, see spende(n). 

Israel, sb,, Lat. Israel ; Israel, 31, 29. 
isse, issgte, see be(n), sohete(n). 
istreoned, see streone(n). 
ishnde, adj. OE. gesunde-sunde ; 

sou 7 td, well, 190, 28. 
isimdret, see sundrie(n). 
isimken, see sinke(n). 
iswinch, sb,, Sth. = Ml. swine ; OE. 
geswinc; work, labor, trouble, 

12. 

iswgren (iswprene), see swfre(n). 
iswunken, see s-wynke(n), 
it, italde, see he, telle(n), ^ 



GLOSSARY 


391 


ij)ank, sd.f Sth. = Ml. }>ank; OE. 
ge?Sanc ; thought^ will^ inUntion : 
Sr. i])anke, 178, 13. 
iSenclie(n), wkv,^ Stli. = Ml. 
])enlve(n) OE. ge'Gencean-Sohte ; 
think \ inf. iSenche, 179, 29; 
ijjenche, 214, 23; //. ijoht, 182, 
24. 

ijjgld, i]?9led, see J)9le(ii), J)9lie(ii). 
i]?raste(n), wkv.^ OE. ge’b’rlesten ; 

press y force \ inf i])raste, 190, ii. 
itido^n), wkv.y OE. getidan ; happen^ 
betide \ pr, 3 sg. itit, Ml. tide]), 
180, 3. 

itimbbred, see timbre(n). 
itxmed, see time(n). 
itit, itgld, see itide(n), telle (n). 
itra vailed, see travaile(n). 
itorned, see t-arnie(n). 
ludas, Lat. Iiidas. later displaced by 
OF. Judas; Judas y 27, ir. 
ludeus, sb.y pi.y OE. ludeas, L. 

ludteus ; The Jews^ 4, 29. 
itmg, ivaren, see 3ung, fare(xL). 
ivel, see y vel. 

ivele, OE. yfele ; badly ^ evilly^ 



ivere, sb.^ Sth. = Ml. fere; OE. 
gefEra; companion^ 179, 13; pL 
iveren, 1S7, 31. 
ivestned, see festrie(n). 
ivinde(n), siv, Sth.==Ml. finde(n) ; 
OE. gefindan, (finden) ; findy pro- 
vide for; pt. sg. ivgnd, 198, 15. 
iv6(n), stv*, Sth. = Ml. fo(n) ; OE. 
gefon-feng (R) ; seize; pLsgAveng, 
182, 15. 

ivfnd, see ivindeCn). 
iv6r]?ie(n), Sth. = Ml. fdr'&e(n) ; 

OE. geiortiian; pejforrny exectUe; 
pr. sg. ivorJ)e, 184, 17. 
iwakie(ii'), eSth, iwakie(n), zvkv., 
Sth. = Ml. ■wake(n) ; OE. gewacian ; 
awakty rouse from sleep ; inf 
iwakien, 1S2, 22. 

iwar, adj.y OE. gewar; aware; pi. 

iwarre, 199, 3* 
iweddet, see wedde(n). 
iw§nde(n), wkv., Sth. =5 Ml. weii- 
de(n) ; OE. gewendan-wendan ; 


turny wind, go; pt. sg. iwende, 
1 82, 18 ; pp. iwend, 19S, ii. 
iwene(n), 2C//&Z/., Sth. (SEMI.) = MI, 
wene(n); OE.gewenan ; hope, think, 
ween ; pr. 2 sg, inwenest, 54, 29. 
iwfpen, sb., OE. wSpen, *gew^pen; 

weapoji; pi, iwfpnen, 187, 17* 
iwersed, see wersie(n). 
iwhilc, prn., OE. gehwilc; each; 

ivvhillc ( 0 ), II, 12. 
iwil, ywil, sb., OE. gewil ; pleasure, 
will, 193, 5; ds. iwille, 178, 17; 
3wil, 176, 14. 
iwilnet, see wilnie(n'). 
iwis, ywis, adv., OE. gewiss; cer^ 
tainly, 37, 25; ywys, m, 3; 
iwisse, certainly, 177, 16 ; to iwisse, 
1S2, 25. 

iwisse, see iwis. 

iwite(ii), pt, prv., OE. gewitan 
-wiste ; know, wit, learn ; z>£/^iwite, 
41, 14; ywyte, 215, 6; im}. pi. 
iwiteiJ, 197, 18. 
iwlaht, see wlaoie(ii). 
iwonne, see winne(xL). 
i worded, see w6rdie(n), 
iwraht, see wurche(iv). 
iwrit, sb., Sth. Ml. wiit; OE. 
gewrit, mut. ; writing, • hook ; ds, 
iwrite, 179, 1 2. 
iwriten, see write(n). 
iwro5t, see wirke(ii). 
iwundet, see wundio(ii), 
iwuned, see wuiie(n). 
iwur 15 e(n), wkv,, OE. geweortJan 
(wurtJan) -wears (3) ; be, become ; 
pr, I sg, iwur?Je, 194, 17; pp. 
iwurtJen, 184, 22. 
iwust, see wite(n). 

J. 

JSmes, sh., OF. James; Janies, 174, 
29. 

jangle (n), wkv., OF. jangler ; 

dispute, chatter; pr, ppl, jangland, 

89, 13- 

jape, sb,, OF. *jape, *jappe?; joke, 
trick, jape, 1 21, 9. 

jr erom, sb., OF. Jerome ; Jerome, 1 5 1 j 
13 - 



39 ^ 


GLOSS A JR Y 


jes^, see ieste. 

Jesu, Jesus, sk, OF. Jesus, Jesu; 
Jesus, II, i6; Jesu Crist, 33, 14; 
Jesus, 68, 7. 

Jew, sd., OF. Geu, Gieu; Jew, 74, 
25 ; pL Jewes, 137, 5 ; Jews, 136, 
15 ; 130, 29. 

J§aeliim,j^., OF. Joachim 
131, 8. 

Job, OF. Job ; Job, 201, 2. 

Joel, sh., OF. Joel ; Joel, 150,' 20. 
J^han, J9h.n, Jgn, sh., OF. Johan; 
John\ eME. Johan, 12, 24; J§hn, 
106, 19; Jgn?, 88, 21 ; £s. Jgnes, 
131. 25; Jgn, 228, 21. 
jolifbee, sb., OF. jolivete, jolifte; 

jollity^ happiness, 243, 17. 

Jgn, see J^haii. 

Julias, of. Jonas ; Jonah, 73, 30. 
Jordan, sb,, OF. Jordan: Jordan', 
Jorrdan ( 0 ), ii, 21. 
jornay, see jurnay. 

Jorrdan, see Jordan, 
joye, sb,, OF. joie ; joy, 37, 7. 
joyful, adj,, OF.joie + ME. ful ; joyful, 
I39j 27. 

Judas, sb„ OF. Judas; Judas, *j*i, 
28. 

juge, sb,, OF. juge : judge, 90, 27. 
ju^ement, sb., OF. jugement ; judge- 
ment, indictment, 42, 2. 
ju§gre(n), wkv., OF. jugier; judge-, 
pp, juged, 102, 5. 

JdUane, sb., OF. Juliaue; Juliana, 

191. 23. 

July, see Oesar. 

jumay, jumey, sb., OF. jumee, infl. 
by vb. NF. jumeier; journey, 107, 
35 ; jumay, 114, 30; jomay, 163, 4. 
justice, justis, sb., OF. justice; 

justice, 2, 27; justis, 131, 4, 
justise, sb., OF. justice ; judge, 152, 
24. 

Jnus, see Jew. 


ka, ka, for words beginning Tyith these 
letters see ca, efi. forms, 
kam, see oume(n). 


kan, kane, kanst, see cunne(n), 
karf, see kerve(n). 
k0e2lie(n), Sth. = Mi. cache(n) ; 
OF. cachier ; catch ; pr. 3 sg. kec- 
chety, 196, I ; pr, shj. pi. kecchen, 
202, 23. 

kechyn (kiehen), sh., OE. cycene; 
Lat. coquina (cocina) ; kitchen, 99, 
13 - 

keisfr, see caysfre. 
kele(n), wkv., OE. celan ; cool ; Nth. 
inf. kele, 156, 12. 

kembe(n),7e//l». , OE. cemban, cemban, 
ON. kemba; comb) inf. kembe, 39, 
20. 

kempe, sb., OE. cempa; soldier, 185, 
7 ; Sth.^/. kempen, 186, 30. 

kend, kende, see kenne(n), kinde. 

kene, adj., OE. cene; bold, keeii, 
3 - 

kenne(n), who., OE. cennan; know, 
make known, teach) kenne, 51, 
25. Nth. inf, kenn, 129, 25 ; pp. 
kend, 174, 28. 

kep, sb., cf. OE. cepnn ; heed, guard, 
53, 7 ; kepe, 67, 10. 
kgpe(n), wkv., OE. cepan ; keep, pre- 
serve ; inf. kepen, 34, 6 ; await, 
receive, 50, iS; pr. sbj. pi. kepe, 
104, 6. Nth. pr. 3 sg, kepes, 

144. r. 

kepynge, sb., based onkepe([n); keep- 
ing, watching, 103, 2. 
kerve(n), stv., OM. cerfan-carf, WS. 
ceorian-cearf (3) : ca^ve ; pt. sg. 
karf, 79, lo. 

keste(n), who., ON. kasta ; cast', pt. 
sg. kest, 54, 6 ; pt, pi, kesten, 63, 
17; pp. kest, 61, 6. Cf. caste(n}, 
of which this is a secondary form, 
kevel, sb., ON. kefli ; bridk-hil, gag, 
81, 22. 

keveringe, sb., based on OF. (re)co- 
vrir; recover^f, regaining, 209, 4. 
kid, see fcS 5 e(n). 

kin, kyn, sb., OE. cynn ; kin, kind, 
species', gs. kinness (0), 12, 32; ds, 
kinne, 47, 6 ; pi. kin, 70, 13 ; kinnes, 
-46, 25; kyn, 220, 16. Nth. sere 
kin thinges, several kinds qfajpairs, 

127, 3 - 



GLOSSARY 


393 


iinde, kind, kynd, sb.^ OE. cyncl,/ j 
species^ kind^ nature, S, 13 ; kind, 
65, 4; pi- kyndis, 143, 23. Sth. 
kiinde, 19S, 20 ; kiinde trfsdns, 
kind of treasons j 223, i8. Kt. 
kende, 218, 9. 

kinde, adj,, OE. cynde; natural, 
native \ kinde, 22, ii. 
kindle(n), wJcv., OE. [cynd], dial, 
kindle; bring forth, increase \ inf 
kyndle, 237,25; SEMl.^;&.ikindled, 
bom, 14, 8. Nth. inf kindel, 160, 
24 ; p 7 \ 3 sg. kindels, 161, 5. 
kinedom,^^., OE. o.'yxit^ovci] kingdojn, 
47 , 2. 

kinelich, ad/,, OE. cynelic; royal', 
ivk. kinelTche, 183, 3. 
kinel§nd, sb., OE. *cyneland, -Ignd ; 
royal land, kvjgdom^ 184, 14; ds. 
kinelgnde, 189, 10. 
kine'wurtJe, adj,, WS. *cyne\vier 3 e 
-wuriie; royal, 193, 19. 
king, eME. king; sb., OE. cyning, 
cyng; kifig, i, i ; pL kinges, 22, 
16. eSth. ds, kinge, iSi, 2; pL 
kingen, 188, 9. 
kinne, kinnes, see kin. 
kinric, sb., OE. cynciTc; kingdom, 
149, 12. 

kite, sb., OE. eyre ; custom, 34, 4. 
kirk©,kyrc0 (kyrke), sb., ON. kirkja; 
Dan. kirke, eogn. with OE. cyriee ; 
kirk, church, 16, 15; kyree, 133, 
21 ; kyrke, 147, 8. Cf, chirche. 
kirkedure, sb,, ON. kirkja + OE. 

dure; church door, 17, 26. 
kisse(n),«/<^., OE. cyssan; kiss; inf. 
kysse, no, 27 ; pr, pi, kisse, 39, 7 ; 
p£, sg, kiste, 28, 10. 
kissing©, sb,, OM. *cyssung,/ ; hiss- 
ing,^^, i. 

kiste, j^., OE. cyst,/.; choice, selection, 
virtue, 39, 9. 
kiste, see kisse(n). 
kl'iSe(n), wkv., OE. cj^an ; make 
known, show', inf, Wen, 15, 8; 
ki>e, 154, 12; pr, 3 sg. W&tH, 17, 
kid, 31,5; kyd, 133, i. 
klepte, see clf pe(n). 
klSrel^, adv,, OF, cler, diet fly; 
clearly, 136, 21. 


knave, see cnave. 
knawne, see knaw6(ii). 
knawe(n), stv., eME., Nth. « MI. 
knowe(n); OE. cnawan-cneow (R); 
know. Nth. inf knaw, 127, 28; 
pr. 3 sg. knawes, 137, 2 ; //knawyn, 
170, 28. eSth. pr. 3 sg. cnawati, 
179, 21. Kt. inf. , knawe, 2 1 8, 25; 
pr. 3 sg. knawejj, 216, 9. Cf. 
knowe(n). 

kne, sb., OE. cneoCw); hiee; pi. knes, 
78, 22 ; kneus, 122, 31. 
kne^e(n^, 7c^X'2'.,OM. *cneolian, MLG. 
knelen ; kneel; z;/. knele, 123,10; 
pr. ppl, knd}nge, 122, 32; pt. sg. 
kneled, 65 , 29 ; knelid, 340, 3. 
knew(en), see knowe(n), 
knict, knicht, see kni3t. 
knif, sb., OE. cnif; knife, 79, iS. 
kni5t, knict, knicht, knight, knyht, 
sb., OE, cniht ; knight, 46, 16 ; 

75 . 5; knifcht, 75, 7; pi. 
knyhtes, 126, ii; kniattes, 227, 
22 ; knyghtys, 105, 2:. 
knokk©(n), wkv., OE. cnocian, infl. 
by ON. knoka?; knock; i sg. 
knokke, 241, i ; pp. knokked, 163, 
29; kngked, 163, 32. 
knculfclie(n), wkv., OE. cnawan, 
extended by loScan?; acknowledge, 
recognize; inf knoulfche, 51, 3. 
knowe(n), siv., OE. cnawan-cneow 
(R) ; know ; pr. 2 sg. knowest, 38, 
6 ; pr. I sg. knowetS, 17, i ; mip. 
know, 17, 25 ; pt. sg. knew, 41, 21, 
//.//. knewen, 25, 2; knowen, 
104, 22; knowe,.234, 5. &iib..pp. 
icnowen, 198, 8 ; yknowe, 230, 32. 
Cf. Nth. Kt. knawe(3a) ,knaw©(n.). 
know'lyoh(©), der. from vb. know- 
IgcheCn); knoxvledge, 95, 14. 
hnowynge, knowyng, sb., based on 
knowe(n); knowing, knowledge, ^ 8 , 
30 * 

fcnyght, knyht, kny^t, see knijt. 
ko, kd, kg (words)^tf^ co, c6, eg. 
konne, kduth, koupen, see ciin- 
ne(n.), 

krike, sb., OF. criqite ; creek, 86, 24. 
ku, ku (words), see cti, cii. 
kude, see cupm^n). 



394 


GLOSSARY 


kiime, , OE. cyme ; comin^^ 1 83, 20. 
kimde, see kinde. 

ktineriche, sb.^ Stk. « Ml. kinenke ; 

OE. cynerice ; kingdom^ 226, 6. 
kunesman, sb.^ OE. cynesman ; 
kinsman, 207, 15. 

kuppe, kurteisie, see cuppe, cizr- 
teysy. 

kutSan, see cunne(n). 
kweid, see quf d. 

k^weynte, adv., AN. adj. qtieint beside 
O F . coint \ famously, skilfully, neatly, 

48, 15- 

kyd, see kISe(]i), 

kyn (kynne), kyng, see kin, king. 
Kynadius, Kynadyris, sb., Lat. Cy- 
nadius?; Cynadius, 221, 32. 
kyndle(n), see kindle(n). 
kynemerk, OE. cyne + ON, merki ; 
royal mark, 83, 17. 

kyngdom, sb,, OE. cynedom ; king-^ 
dom\ kyngdom^ 105, ii. 
kyrce, kyrke, see kirke. 
kyrtyl, sh , OE. cyrtel ; kirtle^ 92, 30. 
kysse(n), see kisse(n). 


L. 

labour, sb.<, OF. labonr ; labor, 234, 
23 - 

lao, sb., OE. *l3ec, MDu, lac ; lack, 
fault, deformity, 60, 12; lakk, 112, 
25 - 

lao, sb,, eME., Nth. * Ml Igc ; OE. 

lac; gift, offering, 187^ 17. 
lacche(n), wkv,, OE. lasccan-lsehte ; 
seize, catch ; pt, sg. lauhte, 87, 29 ; 
laujt, 50, 21 ; pp, lagt, 22, 17, 
Sth, ilaht, 190, I. 

Jaos(n), stv., eME., Nth. = Ml 
l2ke(n) ; OE. lacaa-leolc (lec) (R) ; 
move, leap, go swiftly ; pt, sg, lac, 
189, 15 ; l|ac, 195, 26. 
lad, ladden, see lfde(n). 
lady, see lavedy. 
lao, see laco(n). 
lad, laden, see lede(n). 
lai, see li©(n). 
laide, lazden, see leie(n). 

Ian, lat, latenn, see If n, let©(n). 


lawed, see lewed. 

laf, pi. laves, sb,, Nth. = Ml, Sth. 
Iff; OE. hlaf; loaf, 132, 4. 

laf, layft‘, sb,, Nth. == Ml. Iff; OE. 
laf, /.; remainder, what is left\ 
layff, 167, 3. Cf. lave. 

laferrd, laft, see laverd, lfve(n). 

lag, see lie(n). 

lage, l^e, la5en, lahen, later lawe, 
sb,, OE. lagii < ON. log, lagu; 
law, custom, 14, 12 ; lawe, 100, iS ; 
pi, lages, 17, 27; laiges, 33, 30. 
eSth. laje, 187, 19; pi. lajen, 190, 
24; lahen, 19 1, 27. 
lagt, see lacehe(n). 

lah, adJ,, eME., Nth. — Ml, low; 
ON. lagr; low, hwnble, 192, 20, 

lahen, see lage. 

lahhe(n), stv., OM. hlahhan, WS. 
hliehhan-hloh (6) ; laugh ; pt, sg. 
lough, 237, 20; pt. pi. lojen, 36, 
29 ; lowe, 46, 8. Sth. inf, lauhwen, 
201, 19. 

lai, laideat, see lie(n), leie(n). 
laiges, see lage. 

lake, sb„ OE. lacu, f. < Lat. lacus ; 

lake, 58, 20. 
lakk, see lac. 

lam, sh,. Nth. = Ml, Sth. If m ; OE. 

lam; loa 77 i, 132, 15. 
lamb, sb., OE. lamb, lamb (Ifmb); 

lamb, Lamb {Christ), 12, 27. 
Lammasse, sb., OE. Izlammsesse < 
hlaf + mcesse ; Lammas, feast q/frst 
fruits, Aug. I ; ds. l, 13. 

land, eME. land (Ifnd), sb., OE. 
land, land (Ifnd); land, i, i ; ds. 
lande, 3, 29; pi. landes, i, 15. 
Cf. Ifnd. 

lane, sb,. Nth. = Ml Ifn; OE, 
Ian (l&n), /; loan, gipt,, favor, 
142, I. 

lang, adj., eME., Nth. for Ml. Ifng; 
OE. lang, Ifrig; long, i, 9. Cf. 
Ifng. 

lang, adj., OE. gelang-lang; depen- 
dent, belonging, dialectal along of', 
iss lang (O), depends on, 10, 14. 
langage, sb,, OF. langage ; language, 
134, 3- Cf. Ifngage. 
lauge, lang, adv., eME,, Nth. ~ 



GLOSSARY 


395 


Ml. longe; OE. lange; /on^, 7, 8. 
3 Srth. lang, 139, 32. 
lare, sd., eME., jcrtli. for ME. Igre; 

OE, lar, f , ; lore, teaching^ 8, 19. 
large, adj.^ OF. large; large ^ 129, 
II ; generous i 20 r, 19. 
larlreliche, see largely, 
largely, adv., OF. large + ME. Ij^; 
laf'gely, charitably, 88, 35. Sth. 
largellche, 204, 22, 
largesse, ^< 5 ., OF. largesse; botiniy, 
la 7 gess, 202, 16. 

larspell, sb., OE. larspel; discourse, 
sermon, Uxatise, 9, 14. 

las, lasse (last), see Ifse(n), Ifs. 
lasse(ii), wkv., based on OE. Iks, 

* less * ; lessen, decrease ; imp. pi. 
lasseS, 196, 7. 

last, lastand, see laste(n), e^idure, 
laste(n), wkv., ON. lasta; blame \ 
inf. ksten, 195, 22. 

Iast3(n), If ste(n), wM, OE. Isestan ; 
last, e}tdu 7 'e\ pr.ppl, lestende, 118, 
5 ; pi^ sg, lastecle, 3, 21 ; pp. last, 
58, 15. Nth. pr. 3 sg. lastes, 129, 
2 ; pr. ppl, lastand, 1 29, 30. Cf. 
lfste(xL). 
lasten, see Ifs. 

lastunge, sb., OE. *lastiing, f. ; cf. 
ME. lasten; bla?iie, 198, 10. 

lat, late, laten, see Ifde(n), lete(n). 
lat, adj., OE. Icet ; late, slow ; comp, 

later (eME.), iSo, ii ; superl. lest, 
132, 30. 

late, adv., OE. Igete; late, 58, 29; 

lately, 99, 15. 
lat?, su Ifte, 

la]?, lath, adj., eME., Nth. for ME. 
If]), lath ; OE. latS ; hateful, loath-- 
some, hostile, evil, 9, 24 ; lath, 127, 
II ; laty (eSth.), 193, 7 ; as sb. 
latJe, 178, 5. 

laSSe, sh., ON. hMa ; barn, dial. Eng. 
lathe, 24, 6. 

Xa'lSe(n), la^i(n), who., OE. la^ian; 
be hateful, loathsome \ mf. latJin, 
194, 15.’ 

ia 1 Sie(ii.), who., OE, latJian; invite\ 
imp. pl,, la?Je 5e, 202, 20, 

Iiatine, Lalaii, adj., OF. Latin ; 
Lcdin, 137, 6 ; gpl. Latines, 191, 18. 


lau, adj., Nth. « Ml. low; OE. lah ; 

low', comp, lauer, lower, 151, 25, 
laud, see lauid. 

Iau5t, lauhte, lacehe(n). 
lauhwen, see lahhe(n). 
lauid, adj.. Nth, = Ml. lewed ; OE. 
iKwed; lay, unlearned', MnE., 
lewd, 134, 7. 

lave, sb., eSth. = Ml. Ifve; OE. laf, 
f.', Ieavij2g, re 7 nna 7 tt, 190, 12. 
lavedy, lavedi, lady, sb. , OE. 
hlKfdige; lady, 116, 14; lavedi, 
129, 19; gs. ladies, 108, 22, Cf. 
Ifvedi. 

laverd, sb., eME., Nth. for Ml. 
Ifverd, Ifrd; OE. hlaford; lord, 5, 
26; laferrd (O), ii, i; eME. fl'j. 
laverde, 194, 13. eSth. hlavord, 
178, 24. 

laves, lawe, see ISf, lage. 
lawful, adj., ON. logfullr; lawful, 

234. n. 

lawlyl^, adv.y based on OE. labile, 
adj,', lawfully, 146, 31, 
lay, sb., OF. lai; lay, song, story, 
116, 8. 

lay, see lie(u). 
layd, layff, see leieCn), laf. 
layk, sb., ON. leikr, cogn. with OE, 
lac ; play, sport ; pi. laykes, 163, 28. 
layn, see lie(n), 

Lazar, OF. Lazarus, 132, 15. 
leac, Ifade, see lace^^n), lfde(n). 
Ifafde, see Ifve(ii). 

Ifafdi, Ifare(n), see Ifvedi, lfre(3i). 
Ifave, Ifave(u), see Ifve, Ifve(n). 
leohe (Ifche), sb., (jM. lece, WS. 

iKce ; leech, physician, 59, 4. 
leche(n), who., OM. lecnian, WS. 
iKcnian, infl. by leche, sb., heal, 
act as physician', inf. leche, 13 1, 
30 ‘ 

leoherie, lechery e, sh., OF, lecherie ; 

lechery, 54, 13; lecherye, 237, 25. 
lechnunge, sb., OE. lachnnng, f , ; 

healing, remedy, 1^2, 10. 

Ifd, sb., OE. lead; lead, 60, 18. 
led, see If de(n), 

Ifdar, sb., OE. l^fre; leader, 166, 
20. 

leiide(n), leddes, see l§de(n). 



GLOSSARY 


396 

iLSde, s^., OM. leden (?), WS. ISden ; 
lan^c^e, sJ>e£cA; orig. Latin < 
latlnus, 48, 18. 

lede, s3.j OE. leode, //. ; people^ 10, 
21. eSth.//. leodan, 183, 7. 

lgde(rL), wkv,^ OE. Ireclan ; lead ; inf, 
Igden, 26, 1 ; Igde, 39, 1 2 ; pr, i sg, 
l|de, 176, pr, 3 sg, lat^lfde??, 
56, 7 ; pt, sg. ledde, 28, i ; lad, 
loi, 3; led, 1.^5, 33; ladde, 185, 
2; pr. 2 sg. ledcles, 48, 24 ; //. pL 
Ijed (eME.), 5, 27; ledden, 6, 10; 
ledde, 57, 23 ; ladd, 116, 2 ; pp, 
led, 35, 3; ledde, 90, 24. ITth. 
pr, pi, Ifdis, 136, 6. eStti. inf 
laden, 180, I ; pr. sbj, sg. Ifade, 
191, 21 ; pp, yladde, 64, 9 ; ilaed, 
176, 5 ; ileid, 2ir, 2. ILt, pr, zsg. 
lede]), 219, 20. 

Ifdene, sd.j OE. laden, leden ; Ian- 
gnage, speech^ 191, 18. Cf. Ml. 
lede. 

Ifdis, see Ifden. 

leef, leeve, see lefl 

Iggs, Igfst, see Ifs. 

Igft, lete(n), Ifve(ii). 

Iff, ^< 5 ., OE. leaf; leaf 51, 22. 

Iff, sb,, OE. leaf, f ; permission, 134, 
32 , Cf. Ifve. 

lef, leef, adj,^ OE. leof ; dear, pleasant, 
arcliaic, lief,^, 26 ; ds. leve, 20, 19; 
leve, wk, 33, 5; lefe, no, 13; 
leeve, 241, 2 ; comp. levere, 2?, 21 j 
lever, 152, 28. INth, leif, 126, 17. 
eSth. leof, 178, 17; leofe, 183, 17; 
ds, leofen, 1S3, 25 ; leofve, 184. 12 ; 
€07np. leovre, 177,5; superl, leofvest, 
181, 22. 

lefde, see Ifve(n). 

Iffdi, leglie(n), see Ifveca, lie(a), 
prevaricate, 

Iffilil, adj., OE. leaf + ful ; allow- 
able, lawful, 235, 7. 

left©, see Ifve^n;. 

leie(n), wkv,, QE. lecgan, infl. by 
P^* 3 sg- ; l<ey, place, put aside, 
banish \ hf, leyge, 52, ii; l^n, 
55, 25; leyn, 87, 3; ley, 89, 18; 
pt, pL laiden, 3, 23 ; laide, 7, 5 ; 
pr. 2 sg, leidest, 84, 16; laidest, 
103, 6; pt. pi, leiden, 189, 28; 


leyd, 91, 23; pp, leid, 27, 6; layd, 
3S5, 23; Sth. y»/&. ileid, 198, 21; 
(SEMI.), yleyd, 66, 32. 
leien, see lie(n). 
leif, leijen, see lef, lie(n). 
leinte, leinten, see lengten. 
Leirchestre, sb., OE. Legraceaster ; 

Leicester, 227, 2. 
lek, see luke(n). 

Ifle, adj., OF. leial; loyal, leal, 128, 

25- 

leme, sb., OE. leoma; lights gleam, 
brightness', pi. lemes, 155, i. 
leme(n), wkv., OE. leomian ; give 
light, shine \ pt, sg, lemede, 61, 14. 
lemman, sb., OE. leofman ; dear one, 
Ie 77 ia 7 i, 43, 15. 
leu, see l§ne(n). 

Ifn, sb., OE. lean; reward; eME. 
Ian (0), 10, 27. 

leade(n), wlv., OE. lendan, lendan ; 
land, andve, abide; inf, lende, 87, 
18. mh, pr. 3 sg. lendes, 143, 5 ; 
pt. sg. lend, 162, 27. 

Ifne, adj., OE. hlsene ; lean, not fat, 
5 * 

Ifne(n), wJrv,, OE. hleonian; lean, 
incline, 122, 30. 

lerLe(ii), wkv., ON. lena, cogn. with 
OE. lanan ; lend; pp. lenedd, 8, 
20; lent, 59, 8. Ntb. inf. len, 
142, I, Sth. pr, sbj. sg. lenne, 

179^ 33 ; ilenet, 194, 7- 
leng, eME. leng, adv, comp., OE. 

leng, leng ; longer, 4, 20. 
lengten, later lenten, leinten, sb , 
OE. lengten; spring, season of 
Lent, 5, 13; gs. lentenes, 121, 23; 
leinten, 200, 3; leinle, 231, 2. 
lengiJe, sb., OE. length, f. ; length, 
20, 24. 

lenne, lent, see l§ne(n). 
lenten, see lengten. 
leo, leoden, see leun, lede. 
leof, Igofe, leofen, see lef. 
leoft, left (lift)* adj., OE. *lyft, 
cf. MDu. luft, ‘ left ’ ; feft {hand), 
182, 4; lift, 225, 8. 
leofve, leofvest, see lef, 
l©op,leorne(n) , jvtf lfp0(n), l©rn©(n). 
leote(m), m l©t©(ia). 



GLOSSAJRY 397 


leoun, Xeun. 

leovemon, sd,, OE. ’‘■leofman(m(5n); 

dear ofze, leman^ 192, 30. 
leovinde, see livle(n), 
leovre, see lef. 

Ifp0(n), stv,^ OE. hleapan-hleop (R ) ; 
leap; inf, Ifpe, 36, 17; pt. sg, lep, 
4; pt.pL lepen, 37,31. eSth. 
pt. sg. leop, 195, 18. 
ler, sb.j OE, Meor; chee^; MnE. 

leer; pL lere, 37, 21. 

Ifred,//. as adj\, OE. l^ran; learned, 
4, 4, eSth. ilKrde, 226, 3. 
Ifro(n), wkv., OE. l&ran [lar] ; 
learn; pr. 3 sg. Ifre'S, 1 6, 19; pt. 
sg. Ifrede, 29, 12; pp. Ifred, 30, 4; 

^37) 29* XSTth./r. 3 sg. Ifres, 
91, 28. Sth. inf. Ifaren (eSth.), 
5; pf'- .3 sg. Ifare'ff, 198, 7; 
pp. ilfred, 198, 4. 

lerne(n), lerne'n), whv. OM. 
lemian, WS. k'oinian; learn; inf 
lemenn (0), 8, 22 j pr. 3 sg. lerne)jJ> 
(O), 10,18 ;pp. lerned, 58, 2 1. eSth. 
inf leornen, 192, 15. ^Va..pl.pL 
lurne]), 225, 4; j&A sg. Inrnede, 224, 
29. 3 j^., 1} erne)), 218, 25; 

imp. sg. lyerne, 2\^,i;pp. ylyeraed, 
215, X. 

lerningcnilit, sh., OE. leomingcniht; 
disciple ; lexniangcnihhtess (0), 12, 
13 - 

Ifs, adj., OE. leas; false, evil, iii, 30. 
Ifs, les, adf, OE. la’s; less; Iggs, 
223, 16; les, 141, 27; lesse, 178, 
4 ; lasse, 225, 6 ; superl. Ifste, 53. 
i6 ; l|st, 178, 5; ds. lasle, 

19^) ^ I *• 233, 30. Kt. leste, 

219, 9. 

Ifs, sd., OE. leas ; falseheod, 231, 33; 
ds. l|se, 183, 35. 

lesoun, lessdn, slu, AN. lecun (OF. 

-on) ,* lesson, 1 98, 1 3 ; lesson, 2 24, 19. 
l§se(n), tvJkv., OM. lesan, WS. llesan ; 
release, deliver, loose; inf. ISsenn 
(0), 1 1, 2 7 ; lesen, 194, H ; imp. pi. 
ISseSi, 20 r, i6j pp. lesedd (0), ii, 
8. Cf. Sth. Iu 3 e(n). 
l§se(ii), stv., OE. leosan-leas (2); 
lose ; inf lese, 53, 25 ; pt. pi lorn, 
< 57 ) n Igren, 4^^) 3 ; l§rn, 52, 


12. Nth. pr. pi. lesis, 126, 6. 
sth. tp. ylgre, 95, 16. 

Ifse(n), siv., OE. lesan-laes (5) ; 

gather, collect; pt. sg. las, 56, 12. 
lesep, lesedd, see Idse(ii), release. 

If sing, lesis, see lfsyiige,J[ese(a). 
lesse, lesson, see Ifs, lesoun. 

If st, lest, see laste(n), lat. 

Ifste, see Ifs. 

lest, leste, adv. conj., OE. Iks 2 Je, 
later iKSpe ; lest, 121, 23; leste, 
202, 23. 

lest, see lete(n). 

lfste(n), laste(n), whv., OE. liustan ; 
last, endure, C 07 iiimie; Nth, inf 
Ifst, 16S, II. ^th.,pr.ppl Ifstinde, 
226, 20. Cf. laste(n). 
lestende, see laste(n). 

Ifstined, see Ifste(n). 
lestned, see listne(n). 

Ifsynge, If sing, sh., OE. leasing; 

falsehood, iii, 13 ; If sing, 40, ii, 
lete(n), siv., OM. letan (WS. latan) 
-let (R) ; let, permit, loose; leave \ 
think; inf. leteii, 6, 13; latenn (0), 
9, 26; lete, 52, 2 ; pr. 2 sg. letest, 
194, 7 ; lest, 63, 5 ; /r. 3 sg. letet), 
16, 21 j imp. sg. let, 1 8, 16; late, 
99 ) 5; pi- sg. lat (eME.), 4, 14; 
let, 13 , 4; lete, 64,14; pt.pL lete, 
35, 28 ; pp. let, 61 , 30; late, 56, 5. 
Sth. inf leoten (eSth.), 193, 21 ; 
Iften, 201, 1 ; pr. 3 sg. lfte6,i8o, 6 ; 
1ft, 180, 7J imp. sg. l^§t, 241, 2; 
imp. pi. Ifted =: letetJ, 201, 17 ; pt. 
pi. letten, 186, 15 ; pp. pi. ylete, 
221, 8. 

Ifth, sh., OE. ; hatred, enmity, 
127, 13. 

lett, OM. *lette, hindrance, let, 
107, 7. 

lette(n), vokv., Nth. ~ Ml. lette(n); 
OK lettan ; hmder, impede; Nth. 
pr. pi. leltys, 146, 17; imp.pl. 
lettes, 139. 14; pt.sg. lett, 16*3, 28. 
Sth,^^. ilet, 226, 17. 
letten, see Ifte(n). 
letter, sh., OF. lettre, 72, 8; pi. 
letters, 71, 23. 

lettyng, sh., based on OE. lettan; 
hindrance, delay, 174, 26, 



398 


GLOSSARY 


letin, ledun, AN. leun, linn; 
Uon^ 14, 1 ; leoun, 82, 17 ; leo, 182, 
13, Cf, lyun. 
leve, see lef. 

Lfve, sb,^ OE. ? ; Leve, 82, 2. 

Ifve, sb., OE. leaf, /.; permission, 
18, 28, eSth. Ifave, 199, 29. Cf. 
Iff. 

Ifve, sb., OE. leafa; belief ^ faith, 
20, 22. 

levede, see lire(n). 

Ifvedi, sb., OE. Elsefdige; lady, 52, 
i; Igvedy, 117, i; Iffdi, 155, 5; 

156, 5. NtE. pi. Ifvedis, 
129, 19. eSth. Ifafdi, 193, 14. 
Cf. lavedy. 

Ifveful, adj., OE. leaffull [(ge)leafa] ; 

believing, faithful^ 234, 4. 
levelike, OE. leoflice; lovingly, 
gladly, 28, 19. 

lfve(ii), wkv,, OE. l^fan; leave, 
permit-, inf, Ifve, 57, 3; pr. pi, 
Igve we, 100, 13 ; imf sg. Iff, Jg6, 
23 ; pr, sbj. sg. l|ve, 47, 22 ; pt, sg. 
lafte, 241, 33; pi, pi. lefte, 223, 
25 ; pt. sbj. sg. lefde, 200, 8 ; pp. 
laft, 49, 19. Nth. inf Iff, 153, 19. 
eSth. inf. Ifaven, 192, 33 ; imp, 
pi. Ifaved, 196, 7; pt, sg. Ifafde, 
i9r, 27; pp. yleft, 225, 10. 
l§v'e(2i), wht.j OM. lefan, WS. llefan 
[geleafa] ; believe ; pr. 3 sg. leve'S, 
16, 19. Nth. imp. pi. leves, 165, 
17; 135, 9. 

lever, levere, see lef, adj. 
levinge, sb,, Nt. = Ml, levinge; 
based on Kt. leve(n), Ml. leve(n) ; 
remainder, residue t 218, 2. 
l9T7e, adJ., OE. hleowe ; warm, 
80, 5. 

lowed, adj., OE. l^wede ; unlearned^ 
lay, as opposed to clerical, 88, 4. 
lewse (=leswe?),j< 5 .,OM. lesCleswe), 
WS. l^s (Iseswe),/ [lesan, ‘glean’]; 
OE. Ises; pasture land, dial. Eng. 
leasow, 31, 1. 

ley, leyen, see leio(n), lie(ii). 
leyhe(n), stv., ON. leika-lek (R); 
play, sport, 79, 8. 

ley^e, sb., OM. leg, W^’S. lieg, mnr, 
flame, 61, 14. 


leyn, ley^en, see lie(ii), leie(ii). 
Lhoaverd, see Lfverd. 
libbe(n), wkv., OE, libban ; live\ 
eSth. mf libben, 192, ii ; libbe, 
177, 9; pr. I sg. libbe (SEMI.), 37, 
8; pr, ppl. libbinde, 217, 21; 
libb)nde, 218, 33. .Cf. live(n). 

lie, see lioh. 

licam, sh., OE. lichama ; body, corpse, 
132, 16. 

liGe(n), lict, see like(n), liht. 
lioh, liche, sb., OE. 11 ^;; boc^, 33, 
25; liche, 35, 10; eME. He, 2, 2. 
liehtman,ji 5 .,OE. leoht + man ; bearer 
of a light, torch-bea?'er, 169, 26. 
liehur, liohdure, sb., OF, lecliur, 
lichur; unchaste person, lecher, 
127, 13; lichoure, 147, 7. 
lid, sb., OE. hlid ; cover, lid \ pi. lides, 
i 4 > 13 - 

lide(n), see liSe(n). 
lien, sb,, OE. *nen < lean ; reward, 
reco 7 }ipense, 178, 8. 
lie(n), siv., OE. licgan-lseg (5) ; lie, 
recline-, belong to-, mf lien, 3, 17; 
lye, 52, 3; 2 sg. list, 48, II ; 

pr, 3 sg. lieiS, 14, 12; ITd, 14, 9; 
pr. pi. Hen, 4, 19 ; pr. sbj. sg. IJe, 
1 2 1 , 20; pt, sg, lai, I, 14; lag, 27, 
30; lay, 47, 25; pt.pl. leien, 190, 
13 ; leyen, 79, 14 ; pp, leyn, 53, 9 J 
lei^en, 58, 20; layn, 29. Nth. 
pr.pl. ligges, 153, 17; lies, 152, 
14. Sth. (SEMI.) inf. ligge, 41, 
30 ; pr, I sg. ligge, 52, 24; pt, sg. 
(eSth.) Isei, 181, 12. 
lie(n), siv., OM. legan-leg, WS. 
leogan-leag (2) j lie, prevaricate, 
deny, be false to ; inf. Hen, X99, 18 ; 
pr. 3 sg, He'S, 199, 15. Sth. inf. 
lihen, 194, 3; pr.ppl. Hhinde, 191, 
21. Kt. pr. 3 s^g. leghej), 214, 

15* 

Kerne, see lern3(n). 

lif, OE. iTf; life, 8, 17; liif, 65, 7; 
lyfg, 106, 15 igs. lives, 48, 3 ; ds, in 
phr. on live, alive, 33, i ; of live, 
41, 32 ; pi. live « lives, 160, 9. 
©Sth. ds, life, 176, 23; l 5 ?ve, 215, 
12. 

life (Uf0s),Kfed,j‘f^ Kve(ii),ldv©(’ii). 



GLOSSARY 


399 


lifedeei, sk^ OE. llfdseg; lifeday^ life\ 
ds, lifeda^e, i86, 20. 

]ifhali, adj\^ OE. *lifhalig ; holy in 
lifc^ holy, 191, 20. 

liliade, OE. llflad,/*. ; way of life ^ 
conduct^ life, 191, 19. 
lift, see leoft. 

lift, sb., OE. lyft ; air, upper region, 
352, 20. 

lifte, wkv,^ ON. lypta, lyfta; Uft\pp, 
lift, 1 43, 4. 

lifte(n), ON. lyfta, cf. Id. lypta 
< lyfta ; lift ; pp. lifted, 10 1, 20. 
li&e, adj,, OF. lige (liege) j liege, 
J2 32 , 20. 

ligeaunce, sh., OF. ligence; allegi- 
ance, 235, 5. 

ligeman, sb., OF. lige (liege) + ME. 

man; liegeman, 233, 31. 
li|§e(n), see lie(ii) ‘ recline.’ 
li^ht, see liht. 
lightly, see li^tli. 

Xii^tbern, sb^, OE. Leohtberend, 
translation of L. Lucifer ; Lucifer, 

^ 68 ^, 5 « 

li^tli, adv., OE. leoiitlice; lightly, 
easily, 50, to. 

li^tnesse, li5tnisse, sb,, OE.lihtness, 
/. ; light, brightness, 66, 32 ; lijt- 
nisse, 67, 22. 


li^tyng, sb., OE. lyhting,/. ; ilhmii- 
nation, 103, 7. 

ligte(n), wliv., OE. llhtan, lilitan; 
make light or easy, alight-, inf 
ligten, 14, 16; pp. ligt, 27, 28. 
Sth. inf lihten, 192, 20; pp. ylist, 

<55, 3 - 

Khen, see lie(n) prevaricate. 
lihhtlike, see lihtlihe. 
lihinde, see lie(n), prevaricate. 

Uht, sk, OM, lat (leht, liht), WS. 
leoht; light-, lict, 82, 20; lyhte, 
XI7,6. 

lihte(rL), see ligte(n). 
lihte(n), wkv., OM. lehtan, WS. 
leohtan, llohtan; light, kindle ; inf 
lihten^ 186, 12; pt.pl, lihtede, 5, 


14. 


lihtlike^ adv., OM. lehtlice, WS. 
leohtllce ; lightly, easily ; lihhtlike 

(O), 13, 5+ 


liif, see lif. 

lik, lich, adj., OE. gclTc ; like-, 1 } che, 
98, 20; like, 126, 10. 
like(n), wkv., OE. llcian; please, 
like ; pr. 3 j^.llke??, I93, 9 ; pr. sbj, 
sg. lyke, 232, 20 ; //. sg, iTkede, 14, 
:6 ; licecle, 176, 13. NTth./r. 3 sg, 
likes, 1 28, 4. 

lim, lime, sb., OE. l!m; lime, 73, 2. 
lira, lime, sb., OE. lim; limb, member, 
3, 13 ; lime, 60, 12 ; ds. lime, 50, 1 5. 
limM, adv., OM. limmelum, WS. 

-m^lnm ; limb by Ibnb, 193, 25. 
limpe(n), stv., OE. limpan-iamp 
(Ipmp) (3); happen, be becoming-, 
3 limpets, 200, 23. 

Iiincol, sb., OE. Lincolne (Lincolle) ; 
Lincoht, i, 5. 

linde, sb., OE. lind, and linde, 
linden, lime-tree, 51, 22. 
Lindeseye, sb., OM. Lindeseg, WS. 
Lindesig,/. ; Lindsey, Island of the 
Lindt, 19. 

line, sb., OE. line ; rope, strong cord, 
81, 14. 

lippe, sb., OE. lippe; lip, 102, 19. 
list, sb., OE. lyst j pleasure, lust, 20, 
16. 

list, lip, see li©(n). 
liste(n), wkv., OE. hlystan; listen-, 
inf. lisstenn (O), 10, 22. Nth. 
imp.Jl. listens, 165, 17. Sth. imp. 
pi, liistetS, 196, 5. 

listne(n), wkv,, *hlystnan, cf. Swed. 
lyssna ; listen ; pr. 3 sg. listneS, 20, 
23 ; pk sg. listnede, 24, 9; lestned, 
98, 29. Sth. inf. lustnin, 191, 19. 
lit, lit, sb., OE. lyt j little ; ds. ITte, 
177, 23 ; lyte, 215, 20; lite, 40,32. 
Sth. lut.few, 198, 30 ; lute, 209, 12. 
litol, lytel, litle,<2i^’., OE. lytel ; little, 
2, 17 ; little (0), 8, 20 lytcl and 
' lytel, little by little, 222, 2i ; lyttill, 
1^5, 2. WMl. luytel, 120, i. Sth. 
Intel, 180, 15 ; lytel, 222, 20. 
liSe(n), stv., OK litJan-latS (1); 

travel- hif lltSe, 1S2, 13. 

Ii8e(ii), ]idi(n), wkv., ON. hlyfSsa; 
listen-, imp. pLV\^^%, 251, ts; lideJtJ, 
106, 6. 3 Nrth./f;AA A|[lhes^t57JO. 
Sth. inf, li^^in^ jtpi [ 



400 


GLOSSARY 


liberie (n), OM. Iei 5 rian, WS. 

lletSriaa (lytJrian) ; lather^ become 
covered with foam; pr. shj. sg. litSerl, 
194, 20. 

live, lives, see lif. 

live(iL), Sth. livie(n), whv,^ OE. 
lifian j live ; mf. liven, 4, 20 ; lyve, 
88, 14; /n 3 sg. liveth, 31, 31 ; 
pi, liven, 34, 10 ; pt. sg. livede, 7, 
16; //.//. liveden, 73, 22; lived, 
73, 2 1 ; pp, lyved, 91, 2. Nth, inf. 
life, 130, 32 ; pr. 3 sg., lifes, 165, i8 ; 
pr. ppl. liffand, 169, 14. Sth. pr. 
pi. livietJ, 196, 18 ; pr.ppl. liviende, 
192, i; leovinde, 194, 24; pt. sg. 
levede, 215, ii, 

I9, inter]., OE. la j to, 90, 1 1 . 
loand, see Ignd. 

lob, sh., OE. lobbe, f; spider, 
103, 9 * 

Igdf sb., OE. IM, f; ]ou 7 mej/, load, 

63, 23- 

Igdlich, Igdlukest, see IgfH- 
Iiodovia, sb., Lat. Lodovia ; Lodovia, 
221, 28 ; see note. 

Lodway, sb., Lodway, 221, 29. 
lof, sb, (?), origin uncertain ; expres- 
sion lof and grin, instruments of 
torture, 3, 14. See note, 
lof, sb., OE.lof; praise; lofF (O), 12, 

Igf, l9fe, sb., OE. hlaf ; loaf, 90, 5. 
lofe(n), see l9ve(n). 
logon, lo^dn, lowe, see lahhe(n). 
loken, see luke(n). 

16 ke(n), wku., OE. lociau; look, keep, 
observe ; inf. loken,. 1 8, 8 ; imp. sg. 
loke, 67, 20; look?, 239, 7; imp.pl. 
lokej), 200, 1 1 ; pr.sbj.sg. loke, 10, 7 ; 
pt. sg. lokede, 40, 26 ; pp. loke for 
I 5 ked in rime, 40, 4. INth. inf. 
hike, 142, 25, Sth. pr. pi. loke]), 
218, 16 ; pr. sbj.pl. loki, 219, 31. 
loking, pp. as sb., based on I6ke(n) ; 

care, keeping, looking, 49, 19. 

Igmb, sb., OE. lamb, lamb (Igmb); 
laffib, 199, 4. 

Idme, adv., OE. gelome ; often, fre- 
que^itly, 176, ii. 

l9nd, sb., OE. land, Ignd (l9nd) ; 
land; loand = Ignd, 226, 6; ds. 


Ipnde, 19, 10. Sih.pl. Ipnden, 182, 
30. Cf. land. 

l9ndie(n), wkv., OE. landian, Ipn- 
dian; land, as a ship; pt. pU 
Igndede, 222, 14. 

Ipng, adj., OE. lang; Ipng; loitg; 

Sth./^r. Ipnge, 181, 5. 

Igngage, sb., OF. langage ; language, 
pi. longages, 224, 4. 

Ignge, adv., OE. lange, Ignge ; long, 
39 >-i 3 - 

l9nge(n), wkij., OE. langian, Ipngian; 
reach forth, extend, belong; htf. 
Ipnge, 221, 32; NEMl. p 7 \ 3 sg. 
Ipnges, 76, 31. 
looke, see 16 ke(n). 

Iiooth, sb., Lat. (Vulgate) Loth ; Lot, 
238, 3 - 

l prd, see Ipverd. 

Igrdeship, sb., OE. hlafordscipe ; 

dominion, lordship, 235, 27. 
Iprding, see Igverding. 
lordship e(n), wkv., based on OE. 
hlafordscipe, sb . ; have lordship over, 
7 'ule; f/^.-lgrdship, 105, 11. 

l pre, OE. lar,/. ; lore, ieachhig, 16, 19. 
Ipre, adj., based on OE. lar, sb.'i; 

learned, 88, 4. 

Ipren (Iprn), see l§se(n). 

L6rn(e), sb., Lome ; Jghn of, 167, 9 ; 

6 . 

losie(n), wkv., Sth. = MI. lose(n); 
OE. losian ; lose, be deprived of; pp. 
ileosed (eSth.), 186, 24. 
lost, see lust. 

Ipte, sb., ON. lat. lati, n. ; counter 
nance, man 7 ier, 30, 8 j pi. l9ten, 28, 
2. Nth. lat, 170, 9. 
l9ti, 19th, adj., OE. laS ; loath, un- 
welcome, 19, 30; 19th, 78, II. 
l9J>li, adj., OE, labile ; loathly, loath- 
so 77 ie, 62, II, Sth. Igdlich, 202^ 
_33 ; superl. Igdlukest, 198, 32. 
loud, adj.^Y^ hlud ; loud, 48, 18. 
l^gh, Louk, see lahhe(n), Luc. 
loute(n), lowte(n), see lute(n). 
loveKeh, adj., Sth.*=ML luvH; OE. 

^luflTcj lovely, handsome, 230, ii. 
lovel^ging, sb., OE. lufu + langung 
Cl9ngung) \ love longing, desire of 
love, 97, 30. 



GLOSSARY 


40X 


l§ve(n), OE. lofian; praise \ 

eME. inf, lofenn (O), 9, 25; pp, 
loved, 159, 5. ITth. pt, pL lovyt, 
175, iS. 

l9verd, Igrd, sb., OE. hlafweard; 
Io 7 'dy 14, 15; I'^rd, 25, 12; Igrd^, 
106, 2S. Ntli. without ending, 
Igrde fete, 132, 12. Sth. hlaverd, 
17S, 24; Lhoaverd, 226, i. 
l9verding, larding, sb,, based on 
Igverd; lordmgjord,sir\ Igverding, 
80, 22 ; larding, 42, 9. 
lovis, loviynde, see luve(n). 
lovynge, lovyng, sb., OE. lofung, 

; praise, laudation, 145, 23; 
lovyng, 169, 4. 
lovyt, see l9ve(ii). 
lowe, OE, hlaiw, hlaw-hlawe; 

cave, earlier momid, hill, 62, 11. 
lo-we(ii), wkv., based on OE. lag< 
ON. lagr, *• low ' ; make loiv ; pt. sg. 
lowed, 103, 17. 

lowe, lowte, see lahlie( 3 i), lut©(ii). 
Lewis, OF. Louis < Hlo?y wig ; 
Louis ; Lowis of Bavere, Louis of 
Bavajda, 162, 9. 

Luc, Luk, sb,,OY, Luc ; Luke, 209, 
19. Nth. Louk, 148, j. 

Lucie, OF. Lucie j Lucy, Seint, 
229, 21. 

lude, adv,, OE, hlude ; loudly, aloud, 
36, 28. 

lufe(n), see luve(ii). 
lufredene, sb,, OM. lufreden, "VVS. 
lufr^den, f ; love, friendship, 1 54, 
12 . 

\ufsum, adj,, OE. lufsum; loveable, 
lovely, 192, I ; supeiL lufsumest, 
193, 24. 

lufsumlichLe, adv., OE. lufsumlice; 

kindly, graciously, 193, 28. 
lufte, Stb. « Ml. liftj OE. lyft; 

air*, ds, liifte, 178, 27, 
lake, see 16 ke(n). 

luke(n), siv„ OM. lucan-lec (WS. 
leac) (3) ; loch*, zT^luken, 14, 13; 
pr, 3 sg, luketi, 19, 15 ; sg, lek, 
21 ; pt,pl, luken, 189, 38 ; pp. 
loken, 77» 32. - 

Lundeu, sb,, OE. Lundon (-den); 
London.*, ds, Lundene, 2, 8. 

D 


Lundenisc, -issc, adj., OE. Lun- 
denisc ; of Londofi ; wk, Lun- 
denisce, 2, 8; Lundenissce, 5, 32. 
lurdan^ji., OF.lourdein; lazy person, 
138, 2. 

lurke, wkv,, perh. OE.*irircian, based 
on *lnran; lurk; pr, ppl, lurkand, 
16S, 17. 

lurnede, lurne]?, see lerne(n). 
luriLie(n), see l©rne(n). 
luse(n), wkv., Sth, » Ml. l^e(n) ; 
WS. llesan (lysan); release, deliver ; 
iliisd, 180, 14. Cf. l©s©(2i). 
lust, sb,, OE. lust ; desire, lust, in 
older sense oi pleasure; lusst (O), 
12, 16; luste, 144, to; pi, Idstes, 
216, 28. 

luate(n), see liste(n), lisien, 
luste(n), ivkv., OE. lystan ; be pleas- 
ing, delight ; pt. sg. liist, 233, 30. 
l\istni(n), see listue(n). 
lut, see lite. 

lute, sb,, OF. lut ; luie, 237, 10. 
lutel, see litel. 

lut©(n), loute(xi), loWe(n), siv,, 
OE. lutan-leat (3) ; bow, incline the 
head, worship; iff. loute, 53, 17; 
lowte, 145, 24 ; pt,pl, lutten, 25, 3. 
liiper, see lythyr. 

lii'Sere, adv., Sth. ~ Ml. li])ere ; OE. 

lytJer; badly, terribly, 194, 20. 
lutl©(n), wkv,, Sth. =s Ml. lltlen, 
litlen; OE. lytlian; belittle, 194, 

23. 

luve, sb,, OE. lufu ; love, 4, 32. 
luve(ii), Sth. luvie(n), wkv,, OE. 
lufian; love*, inf, luven, 21, 6; 
luve, 37, pr. I sg, luve>, 37, 6 ; 
pt, sg, luvede, 7, 25 ; pt. pi, luveden, 
4, 2 7 ; pp, luved, 8, 3. Nth. pr, pi, 
lufes, 144, 2 ; pt. pi, lufit, 170, 18 ; 
pf, lufde, 140, I. Sth. (SEMI.) 
inf, luvTen, 17, 27; luvie, 47, 23 ; 
pr, ppl, loviynde, 219, 27 ; sbj, 
sg. luvie, 191, 20. 

luxurie, sb., OF,, luxujie, luxure; 

luxury, wantonness, 238, 2. 
luytel, l^chej see litel, Ilk. , , 
lye(n), see lle(n). i - ^ 

ly euge, sb., bas^ on of 

legan, < prevaricate*; tyikg, 147, 20. 

d 



402 


GLOSSARY 


lyernie(n), Iffe, see lerne(n), lif. 
lyg©> lyghtly, see lige, l^tly. 
lylit, lyke(n), see lilit, like(n). 
lykixe(ii\ wJirv., OE. *lTcnian, cf. 
Swed. iTkna ; iz^e?^, make like^ com- 
Jiare; zn/Aykne, 224, 23. 
lykynge, sd., OE. llcung,/ ; IzVem^, 
pleaszire, 117, 28. 
lyte, l^el, see lite, litel. 

I7J), sh., OE. Iic 5 ; joint, Iwib, 50, 15. 
lythyr, adj., OE. ly?Jre; evil^ bad, 
III, 30. Stk. lu])er, 207, 10. 
lyttill, l^e, see litel, lif. 
lyun, sd., AN. liun, leun ; hm, 48, 
16. Cf. leun. 
lyve(n), see live(n). 
lyvynge, J< 5 ., based on live(n) ; Uvmg, 
condition of life, 120, 2. 


M. 

ma, adv,, adj., eME., Nth. for mg ; 
OE. ma; zziore, 6, 3; comp, mare, 
3, 30 j mar, 5, 28; superl. mfst, 
39, 25 ; mast, 132, 27. INth. mair, 
167, 16. Sth, superL m|st, 176, 
7; m^ste, 187, 30 (eSth.). Kt. 
meste, 216, id. Cf. mo. 
ma, mac, macod, see make(n). 
mad, ai(i., OE. (ge)ma^d; mad, 
angry, 54, 27; madd, no, 2d. 
made(n), nassi, see make(n), may. 
m80i(6), see may. 

mSre, adj., OE. mare,* famozts, illus- 
trious, 1 88, 17. 

msessedaei, msest, see messedai, ma. 
Magdalen, sh., OF.?; Magdalene, 
332, II. 

ma^e, sh., OM. mege (mage), WS. 

mffige (mage); kinswoman, I77» 5* 
ma5e, ma33, see muge(2i). 
magt, maht, mahtg, ^< 5 ., OM. mseht, 
WS. mcaht. A* might, power', magt, 
20, 13 m^hte (O), 10, 15. Cf. 
mi^t. 

mahen, mai, see mugi(n). 
m?i, may, sb., 0 E. m8eg,/. (?) ; maid, 
earlier kinsijooman’i, 45, 7; may, 
4h 8 . 


maid, see make(n). ^ 
maiden, meiden, maide, sm, OE. 
msegden; maiden', meiden, 14, 19; 
maide, 36, 5 ; pL maidenes, 36, 17. 
Sth. meiden, 191, 19 ; meidcnes, 
196, 24; gpl maidene, 190, 26. 
maig, see muge(n). 

Mailrgs, sh., Mailros, 223, 3. 
maine, sb., OE. msegen, msegn; 

might, main, 138, 26. 
maine, meyne, mfn3e, sh., OF. 
maisnee, mainee; household, re- 
tainers, 46, 14; meyne, 57, 10; 
mfnse, I37> 4J mfnSbe, 167, 30. 
mainlf s, aej., OE. mregenleas ; pozver- 
less,i7,S‘ 

maintfne(n), wkv., OF. maintenir; 
aid, mainiaizi', inf. mainlfne, 158, 
20. 

mair, see ma. 

mair, sb., OF. maire ; mayor, 233, 2. 
mair alt ee, j A, OF. mairalle ; mayor- 
cdiy, office of mayor, 232, 24. 
maister, mayster, may stir, sb., OF. 
maistre: master, 54, 28; mayster, 
I 39 > 30? maystir, 136, 25. Sth. 
meister, 198, 0. 

maistrie, maistri, sb., OF. inaistrie ; 
mastery, lordship, dominion, 2cd, 
32. Nth. maistri, 14S, 16. 
mak, make, sb., OE. (ge)maca ; 

eqtial, mate, companion, 129, 18. 
make(n), eME. maken, Sth. 
makie(n), wkv., OE. macian ; make, 
do; inf. maken, 17, 19; pr. 3 sg. 
mice!&, 14, ii; pr. ppl. makand, 
loi, 8 ; sg. makede (eME.), 2, 
4; makod (eME.), 2. 23; maket 
(eME.), 5, 3 ; makede, 3d, 20 ; 
made, 21, 12; 2 sg. makcdest, 

38, 28; madest, 5d, 14; pt. pL 
makeden (eME.), 7, 19; maden, 
56, 24 ; made, 204, 26 ; pp. maked 
(eME.), 2, 28; maked, 34, 23; 
mad, 1 1 7, 17. Nth. inf. make, 
129; 4; 129, 5 ; pr. 3 sg. mas, 

108, 24; (INth.)/*^. sg. maid, I'd7, 
19. Sth. inf. makien (eSth.), 190, 
28; makeje (^Sth.), 184, 18; 

mSklen, 226, 12; imp. makre^, 
202, 19 ; pr. ppl. makand, loi, 8 ; 



GLOSSARY 


403 


f>p, imalced, 226, 12 ; imad, 61, 7 ; 
ymad, 203, 23. 

Malduit, sd., Malduit; Malduit or 
Miniduit\ William, 4, 22. 
malisun, sb,, AN. maleisnn, malisim; 

malcdiciio 7 t, 77, 29. 
man, see mun(e). 

man, mon, sb,^ OE. man (mgn); 
man^ 2, 27; mon, 43, 2S; gs, 
mannes, 3, 16 ; ds, manne, ii, 17 ; 
//. men, 1,16; gpl, manne (eME.), 
14, 20. Nth. man, 127, 22 ; mane, 
I45> 28;^j. mans, 137, 19; gpL 
men, 147, 13; mens, 147, 25. eSth. 
as, monne, 203, 2 ;^//.monnes, 1S5, 

13 ; monnen, 185, 31 ; dpL monnen, 
1S5, 27. 

man, me, tndef, pm.^ OE. man, sb , ; 
one, sofue ; maim (O), 10, ii ; me, 

2, 22 ; men, 87, 9. 
man, see mune(n). 
man, sb,, eME,, Nth. = Ml. m^n; 
OE. gemana j compmiwnship, mar- 
riage, mtercoitrse , 192, 17. 
manas, sb., OF. manace, menace; 
menace, 94, 32, 

manasinge, j^. and pr.ppl. , OF . mena- 
cier, manacier; 7iienacing, threat', 
pi. manasinges, 159, i. 

Manassen, sb,, Lat. as. Manassen ; 
Manas sell, 24, 23. 

mane, sb.. Nth. = Ml. mgne; OE. 
’^m.ane, *msene, cf. m&nan; moan, 
complaint, 165, 8. 
maneir, see manere. 
maneh^nde, mankynde, sb., OE. 
♦mancynd ; mankind, 145^ 15; 
mankynde, 242, 3. 

man§r(6), sb., OF. maniere ; manner, 
sort, ki?id of, 64, 21 ; pi. manors, 
92, 14. iNth. maneir, 173, 8; 
maner, 222, 17, 

manheid, sb., Nth**=iMl. manhfde; 

OE. *manha:d,/ ; manhood, 1 73, i r. 
mani,mam5, oiij., OE. manigjmgnig; 
manp, 3, 13; manlj (O), 9, 8; 
manie a, 32, 8 ; pi. manie, 4, 25 ; 
mamge, 25, ao. eSth. gs* manies, 
177, la ; in menye«Lat, in multis, 

maniflBldlic, adj., eMB.=t Ml. mani- 

D d 


f§ldli ; OM. manigfaldlTc, \VS. 
-feald- ; ma^ii/old, numerous, 5, 3, 
mani^e, see manl. 

manke, sb., OE. mancus ; fnattcus, 
eighth of a pound, 17S, 14. 
mankin, sb., OE. manncynn; man- 
kind ; mannkinne nede (O) = OE. 
manncynna ned, 7ieed of inankmd, 
II, 7; mankin, 18, 27 ; mankinne, 
56, 2. Sth. moncun, 1S4, 3. 
manly, fl!i/z;.,OE. mannlTce; manfully, 
boldly, 1 1 2, 22. 
manne, see man. 

manred, sb., OM. manreden, WS. 
-rwden ; hoiuage, 2, 28 ; manrede, 

79» 23* 

mantel, sb., OF. mantel ; i?iantel, 
239, 8. 

man^falde, adj.. Nth. = Ml. manl- 
fgld; manifold, 137, 20. 
many what, indef. pm., OE. manig-t- 
hwcet ; marzy things, 89, 9. 
mar, see ma. 
maroat, see market, 
marchal, see marescal. 
marchand, sb., OF. marchand ; mer- 
chant, 106, 26 ; marchancle, 107, 10. 
marchaundye, see marchaundyse. 
marchaundy se, .rA, OF. marchandise; 
merchandise, 120, 18 ; 7 zemsg. mar- 
chaundye, 95, 22. 

M^e, mare, see Marie, ma. 
marescal, marchal, sb., OF, mare- 
scal ; marshal, 227,4; roatchal, 3 30, 
33f* 

marten, see morwen. 

Marie, Mare, sb., OF. Marie ; Mary, 
24? 29; 'without ending Marie 
d§ie, 201, 22. Nth. Mare, 131,9. 
MSrius, sb., Lat. Marius ; Marius, 
mythical king of Britain, 220, 18. 
market, marcat, sb , OE. market; 
market, 120, 25, Sth. ds. marcatte, 
213, 7. 

marre(n), wkv., OM. merran, WS. 
mierran ; hinder, waste, mar ; pt.pl. 
marryd, ii3, 24. 
marter, martir, see martyr, 

Martha, Marthe, sb., Lat. Martha; 
Maziha, 132, 13 ; Marthe, 201, 20; 
gs. Marthe, 201, 30. 


2 



404 


GLOSSARY 


Martin, sb., OF. Martin; Martin^ 
abbot of St. Neot’s, i, ii. 
martir, martyr, sh,, OE. martyr (L) ; 
martyr^ martir, 191, 23 ; marter, 
1 16, 16 ; martyrs, 3, 5. 
ma^, see make(n). 
masse, OE. msesse; viass^ 51? 6* 
massedsei, mast, see messedai, ma. 
mast, sb,^ OE. msest; mast {of a ship), 
86,25. 

master, wkv,, Nth. = Ml. maistre(n) ; 
OF. maistrer ; master ; pt» sg. mas- 
terit, 172, 31. 

mater, sb,, OF. matere ; matter, 
1 2 - 9 , 3 * 

matines, sb.pl., OF. matines; jnaiins, 
morning service, 51, 6. 
matremoyne, sb., OF. matrimoine; 

matrinmiy^ 147, 20. 
maugre, mawgre, prep,, OF. mangj e ,* 
in spite of\ mawgre, 136, 30; 
mangre his, in spite of him, 137, ii. 
maumet,mawmet, j/ 5 ., 0 F. Mahomet; 
ma/iometj then idoi, 141, 27; maw- 
met, 192, 4. 

mamnetry, mawmetry, sb.y based on 
maumet; idolatry^ 135, 9 ;//. maw- 
metry se, 145, 12. 
mawgre, see maugre, prep. 
mawgre, sb,, OF. maugre; ill-will, 
displeasure, evil, 159, 2. 
mawmet, see maumet. 
mawmetry, mawmetry se, see mau- 
metry. 

Maximian, sb,, Lat. Maximianns; 

Maximian, 192, 3. 

Maximus, sh, Lat. Maximus ; Maxi- 
mus, 221, 12. 

may, mayht, see mai, muge(n). 
may,j^., OE. m^g; relative, kinsman, 
153, 21. Bth. mei, 177, 5 ; miei, 
383, 12 (eSth.) ; ds, mjeie, 184, 16. 
mayle, sb., OF, maile ; coat of mail, 
TZ2, 24. 

mayn, sb., OE.msegea \ force, strength, 
power, 41, 2. 

maynt©igne(n), wkv. , OF. maintenir ; 
maintain ; inf. meynteigne, 233, 
30 ; pp. maynteigned, 234, i. Cf. 
maintfne(n). 

mayster, maystir, see maister. 


me, me (mee), see man, ic. 
me, adv. conj., cf, OFris. MDu. men ; 
but, 194, 6. 

Mearch = March, sb., OF. March, 
Mars; March, 197, 9. 
medcyu, see medeoine. 
mede, sh., OE. med,y*. ; reward, 10, 
28. 

mede, sh., OM. *mede, WS. maede; 

meadoiv, 7 nead, 35, 14, 
medecine, sb., OF. medicine ; medi- 
cine', medcyn, 143, 13. 
meete(n), see mete(n). 
mei, see may, muge(n). 
meiden, see maiden, 
meister, meit, see maister, mete(n). 
meiiJhad, sh., OE. m^gShad; vir- 
ginity, 192, 17. 

mek, adj., ON. minkr; meek\ meke, 
92, id!. eSth. meok, 195, 13. 
mekelioh, mekely, see mekly. 
meke(n), wkv., OM. *mecan?, cf. 
ON. miukr, ‘meek'; 7nake meek', 
pt. sg. meked, 96, 23. 
mekenesse, see meknes. 
mekil(l), see micel. 
mekly, adv., based on mek ; tiieekly, 
96, 30; mekely, 146, 30. Sth. 
mek^lich, 236, 8. 

meknes, mekenesse, sb., based on 
mek; meekness, 100,6; mekenesse, 
236, 28. 

mekyll, see micel. 
mei, sb., OM. mei, WS. msel ; time, 
occasion, meal, 21, 16. 
meld, wkv.. Nth. = Ml. melde(n); 
OE, meldian, meldian; declare, 
accuse ; Nth. inf. meld, 155, 31. 
melle(n), wkv., OE. medler, meller; 
mix, mingle, meddle-, Sth. pp. 
imelled, 221, 24; ymelled, 223, lo. 
mellyng, sb., based on OF, meller; 
mingling, 224, 13. 

membre, sb., OF. membre; mefnber, 
232, 21. Nth. pi. membris, 130, 
24. 

memorie,r( 5 ., OF. memorie; memory, 
remembrance, 119, 2, 
menaoe(n), wkv., OF. menacier; 
menctce , , threaten ; inf menacen, 
104, 25. 



GLOSSARY 


405 


mend, whf,, ITth. = Ml. mende(n); 
OF. amender; correct y amende aid, 
I39» lo- 

m|ne(n), whf., OF. mener; manage, 
urge on\ behave, act', irth. 
mfnd, 158, 13. 

mfne^n), tvkv,, OE. m^nan ; mean ; 
indicate^ signify ; moan, complain ; 
pr, I sg. mfne, 20, 21 ; pr, 3 sg. 
m|ne])> (O), 9, 3. mh. pr. 3 sg. 
mfnes, 83, 10 ; pt, sg. mfnyt, 
moaned, 167, 12; merit, 156, 16. 
mfnes, sb. pt., AN. meien, OF. 
moien, ^ adj\, * mean, middle ’ ; 
means, intermediary, 236, 10. 
m|n3e, mfn5lie, see maine. 
menniask, adj., ON. menskr, cogn. 

jyith. OE. mennisc ; hzwian j wk. 
^•^ennisske (0), 12, 4. 
menske, sb., ON. mennska ; digiity, 
honor, 194, 32. 

men8ke(n), wkv., ON. menska, sb., 
cogn. with OE. mennisc ; dignify, 
honor*, Nth. pr. 3 sg. menskes, 
129, 27. 

ment, meny, see mfne(n), mani. 
mfnynge, sb., OE. *m«nung, f.\ 

meaning*, to ni|n}nge, in meaning, 
222, 28. 

meok, merMe, see mek, miracle, 
mere, sb., OAng. merce, WS. mkree ; 

marh, 130, 17. 

mercer, sb,, OF. mercier; mercer, 
198, 28. 

mercery e, sb., OF. mercerie ; merce? y, 
company of mercers or cloth mer- 
chants, 232, 21. 

merci, meres OF. merci ; mercy, 

thanks, 25, 24; mercy^, 154, 27. 
merciable, adf, OF. merciable; 

merciful, having mercy, 104, 23. 
merciful, adj,, OF. merci + ME. ful; 
merciful, 104, 17. 

Mercii, sb., Lat. Mercii; Mercians, 
225, 21. 

merefe, see merox. 
mere, sb., OAng. ♦merre, allied to 
merran, WS. mierran, * hinder'; 
hindrance, 128, 17. 
merie, mery, see mirie. 

Merlin, sb., Merlin, 191, 13. 


merre(n), wh)., OE. merran; mar, 
injure*, pr. 3 sg. merri' 5 , 194, 32, 
mersuine, sb., OE. mereswln ; sea- 
pig, porpoise, dolphin, 151, 27. 
merveyle, mervayl, sb., OF. mer- 
veille; marvel, 90, 19; mervayl, 

fis. 1?. 

mery, see mirie. 

mes, sb., OF. mes; mess, course at 
tctble, feast ; pi. mes, 57, 4. 
meschef, mischef, sb., OF. meschief; 
mischief, trouble ; mischefe, 1 18, 3 ; 

mesche v) s, 1 3 6, 2 8 ♦ USTth. mis- 
cheif, 169, 13. 

mesellfenn, meself, see self, 
messa|:e, sb., OF. message; message; 

errand, embassy; message, 206, 6. 
messager, messan^er, sb., OF, mes- 
sage! ; messenger; pi. messageres, 
96, 9 ; messangerys, 106, i. 
messe, sb., OE, mcesse, messe ; mass, 
9, 2. Cf. masse. 

messeboc, messebok, sb., OE. 
msesseboc, messeboc ; mass book, 
missal, 9, 2 ; messebok, 76, 26. 
messedai, sb., OE. mtesse (messe) 
dreg; znassday, as. 1,12; massedsei, 
1, 19. 

messegfre, sb., OF. messe + ON. 
gervi ; mass garments, things per- 
taining to the mass, 76, 24. 
messesfng, sb., OE. msesse (messe) 
sfng; song of the mass, 34, 19, 
messinge, sb., OF. mes + ME. -inge; 

messing, eating together, 215, 22, 
mfst, see ma. 

mester, mister, mysteir, sb., OF. 
mestier; office, trade, occupaiion, 
need, necessity; mister, 139, 10. 
INth. it is na mysteir, there is m 
need, 170, 24. 

mfsdre, sb., OF. mesnre; measure, 
I 4 fj, 16. 

mfte, mft, sh, OE. mete; meat, 16, 
ii;pL mften, 22, 15. Nth. mft, 

mete(n), •mku., OE. metan; meet% 
inf. meete, 239, 21 ; pr. sbj. sg. 
mete, 138, 20; pt. sg. mette, 66, 5; 
pt. pi. mettin, 60, 27; mett, 112, 
22, INth. inf. meit^met. 170, 2. 



4o6 


GLOSSARY 


3XLfte(iL), OE. gem^tan ; dream ; 

p, s^. mette, 227, 12. 
mfte(n), siv,, OE. metan-mjet (5) ; 
measure j mcie\ p, sg. mette, 128, 
18. 

mepynkyjj, see J)inke(n\ 

mott, sb,j OE. met; mcasus'e^ 147, 

15- 

mett, mette, mettin, see mete(n). 
mftyng, OE. mating,/. ; dream ^ 
2285 26. 

metyng, OE, metnng; meetings 

175. 8- 

meyne, see maine. 
meynteigne(n), j^<?mayiiteigne(rL). 
mi, my, see min. 

micel, mycel, michel, micEe, 
mooEe, adj,^ adv.^ OE. mycel; 
much, great, large ; mycel (eME.), 
4, 12 ; michel, 38, 9 ; michil, 26, 
14; michele, 64, 2 ; miche, 65, 17; 
myche, 125, 20; moche, 92, ii ; 
Hth. (NE.\11.) mikell (O), 8, 21 ; 
mikil, 52, 12; mekyll, 112, 20; 
myke4, 124, 9; mikel, 149, 28; 
mekil, 135, 3. StE. rniichel, 176, 
12; ds, muchele, 179, 3; Jds» 
miiclere, 185, ii; miichelere, 188, 
4; miiche, 181, 23. 

MicEelmasse, s3., OF. Michael + 
maesse; Michaelmas, 209, 19. 
mid, mide, mit, prep, adv., OE. 
mid ; with, r, 6 ; mide, 15, 28 ; mit, 
14, I r. 

middaei, sh., OE. middaeg; midday, 
I, 16. 

middelj sb,, OE. middel; middle, 
ds. midle, 182, 15. 
middeleerd, see midelfrd. 
middelniqEt, adj., OE. middelniht; 
midnight, 82, 19. 

middenfard, sb., eStE. — Ml. mid- 
dengrd; OE. middaneard; middle 
dwelling, earth, 180, iS. 
mide, see mid. 

midelfrd, sL, OE. *mlddel geard, 
cf. middan (mid) geard ; muU 
dwelling, abode of man, earth, 157, 

; 15. eSth. middelt^rd, 184, 22. 
teidewintre, midwiptep,. sb., OE. 

‘ ' jmddewipter; midwifftef'^ mide- 


wintre dsei, Chiistmas day, 2, 10; 
midwinter, 7, 31. 

midside, sb., OE. mid + side ; inid- 
side, middle of the side, 61, 15. 
midwinter, see midewintre. 

Mi3Eel, sb., Lat. Michael, OE. Mi- 
chahel; Michael, 67, 19. 
mi5t, mi^Et, myght, sb., OM. masht, 
miht, WS. meaht, miht; might \ 
misht, 55, 13; myght, 106, 22; 
pi. mi5tis, 51, 18; my5tes, 103, 
10. 

mi^tful, miEtful, sb. , ME. mist + fnl ; 

mighty, loi, 22; mihtful, 153, 21. 
migEii, adj.,^ OAng. mmhtig, WS. 

mihtig; mighty, 136, i. 
migte, see muge(n). 
miEte, miEEte, see muge(n). 
miEtful, see mihtful. 
mikell, mikyll, see micel. 
milce, sb., OE. milds, milts, f ; 
mercy,!, 4\ 

milde, adj., OE. milde ; mild, 2,37; 

comp, mylder, 92, 17. 
mildeli, mildelike, myldely, adv., 
OE. mildelTce, mlldelice; mildly, 
18, 10; myldely, 97, 25; mild'ell, 
131, 2. 

mildnes, sb., OE. *mildenes ; mercy, 
mildfiess, 102, 30, 

mile, sb., OE. mil, f . ; mile ; lofig 
time, 38, I. 

milk, sb., OE. meoluc, mile ; milk, 

23. 

min, mi, my, pos. prn., OE. min; 
mine, 8, 13; mi, 38, 30; my, 52, 
18. eStE. minne < mine, 1S4, 12, 
fds. mire < minre, 182, 4. 
minde, adj., OE. *gemynde, mynde; 

mindful, minded, 56, 3. 
ministre, sb., OF. ministre ; minister^ 
//. mynystyrs, 147, I'j'fpL ministris, 
105; 13- 

minne, minstre, see min, mynstre. 
minte(n), wkv., OE. myntan ; think, 
inte7id ; pt. sg. mint, 4, 20. 
miracle, eME. miracle, . sb., OF. 
miracle; miracle; miracle, 5, 3; 
miiacle, 80, 7 ; myracle, 99, 30. 
Wth. meraclcj 131, 31. 
mire, see min, 



GLOSSARY 


407 


mire, sd,, OE. myre; mzrSj 164, 31. 
mire5J)e, myrthe, OE, myrhj),/.; 
mirth, 43, 12; myrthe, no, 30. 
Sth. murhcJe, iSo, 32 ; miirtye, 194, 
32 ; //. miirE< 5 en, 196, 17. 
mirie, merie, mery, a£^\, OE. 
myiige; merry, pleasatit, 57, 14; 
merie (Kt.?), 245, 22; mery, no, 
28. Sth. miirje, 244, 15. 
mirke, mirk, adj,, OE. myrce, ON. 
myikr; dark, murky, 16, 16; mirk, 

77 , 7 - 

mirknes, sL ON. myrkr, cogn. with 
OE. mirce + ME. -nes ; mitrkimss, 
darkness, 150, 19. 
mis, see mysse(n). 
mischefe, mischeif, see meschef. 
misdede, Sth. misdfde, sh., OM. 
misded, WS. misdad, f,] misdeed, 
2T, 9; //. misdedes, 18, 13. Sth. 
misd|de, iSo, 10. 

misdo(n), aiw,, OE. mi'sdon; do 
amiss, misdo\ inf, misdon, 2, 4; 
pt. pi, mysdede, 97, 2. Sth, pt, 
pi, misdiide, 179, 10; pp, misdo, 
206, 30. 

miseise, sb,, OF, mesaise; misease, 
trouble, 202, 27. 
miself, see self. 

misleve(n), wku,, based on OM. 
levan, WS. lievan ,* discredit, dis~ 
believe”, pp. misleved, 199, 13. 
mislioh, adj,', OE. mislic; wanting 
in likeness, miserable (?), 194, 28. 
misliche(n), vuko,, Sth. * Ml. mis- 
like (n) ; OE. mislician ; dislike, 
be displeasing', pr, 3 sg, mislichetJ, 
176, 13. 

miss, see mysse. 

mist, sb,, OE. mist; mist, 16, 20. 
eSth. ds, miste, 176, r8, 

mistake(n), wkv., ON. mistaka 
-tok (0); mistake) pp, mistSkin, 

156, 24. 

miste^ see mist. 

mi^tSr, mysteir, see master. 

mit‘, see mid. 

mi]?e(3i), siv,, OE. mi?yan-matS (x); 

avoid, conceal ; inf mijie, 84, 32. 
mia?, so, as adj\, OE. nxecvx, mix; 
dun^hin, 194, 25. 


I mg, adv,, adj,, OE. ma, adv . ; more, 
32, 17; cofnp, mgr, i, 7 ; super I, 
mgst, 29, 8 ; iSe mgsle, ^he greatest, 
19, 2 ; mg^sf, 232, 19. eSili,C 07 /ip, 
moare = mgre, 226, 5. Cf. ma. 
mgbill, mgbyll, ac^\, OF. moble, 
older mueble, moeblc; moveable, 
147, 24; as mgbylls, 147, 28. 
moche, see micel. 

mod, sb,, OE. mod ; courage, pride, 
18, 10; mood, 227, 21; ds, mode 
(eSth.), iSi, n. 

moder, sb,, OE. modor; mother, 7, 
8 ; mooder, 241, 2; modur, 128, 28 ; 
modyre, 146, 25 ; gs, moder, 220, 
16; moodres, 240, 33. 
modi, see mody. 

m6di5nesse, sb., OE. modigness, ; 

couz'age, pride, 9, 25. 

Modrf d, sb., OF. Mordret in Wace ; 
Moored, 181, iS;^s. M6dr|dis, 182, 
5 ; ds. M 5 dr|de, 181, 3 ; Modrfd, 
184, 3. 

modur, see moder. 
m6dy, modi, ad;,, OE. modig ; bf'ave, 
proud, MnE. moody, 48, 1 ; modi, 
192, 3 * 

modyre, see mdder. 
moge (moghte, moht), see muge(n). 
molde, moldjj^., OE. molde ; ground, 
earth, mould, 68, 12. 
mon, mdn, see man, mone. 
moncun, see mankin. 
mone, mon, sb., OE. mona; moo 7 i, 
I, 15. Nth. mon, 150, 23, 
mgne, sb., OE. *mane, *m^ne, cf. 

mienan, wkv , ; moan, 58, 14. 
mond, sb., OF. moneiej money, 162, 
31 * 

monek, see munec. 
mone(n), see mune(n). 
moneliht, sb,, OE. m6na+leoht; 
moonlight, 81, 9. 

mone’S, mone]^, sb., OE. mone'S; 
month, 197, 9 ; pi. m6ne?I, 34, 15 ; 
moiie>, 228, 22. 
monk, monke, see munec. 
monne(n), man, 
montance, mountouns, sb., OF. 
montance, ^N, tnuutance ; atmunt, 
245, 2 ; mpirntpuns, 94, 30. 



4o8 


GLOSSARY 


monument, OF. jnomiment j 

utonuvient^ 143, 9. 

moinsreored, sb,^ OE. mannwerodj 
band of men\ ds. monweorede, 
189, 8. 

mood, mooder, see mod, moder. 
moote, m99st, see mot, mg. 
mor, sb,^ OE. mor ; moor^ waste land\ 
lITth, mure, 169, 22. Sth. //. 
moren, 182, ii. 
m9r(e), see mg. 

more^e, moreghen, see morwen. 
more^entide, moretide, sb,^ OE. 
morgentide ; mommg^ morrow^ 39, 
28 ; moretid, 39, 16. 
moreyn, sb.j OF. morine; murrain^ 
plague^ 224, 26. 
morn, see morwen. 
m6me(n), OE.muman; motirn\ 
p, sg, momed, 106, 13. Cf, 
m’ame(n). 

momyng, sb*^ based on OE. morgen ; 
morning 103, 4. 

momyng, OE.mumung; viotirn- 
mg 92 I. 

Morre, sb.j Moray ^ 158, 20. 
Mortemer, sb.^ OF. Mortemer (-en 
-Brai); Mortimer \ Roger, sixth 
Baron Wignore, 227, 7. 
moi^J, sb,, OE. mort? ; deaths desirttc- 
iion, 184, 23. 

morwe(n), more5e, mom, sb., OE. 
morgen ; morning, morrow, 29, 1 7 ; 
morese, 40, 15; mom, 49, 26; 
maiden, 181, 7; moreghen, 212, 3; 
morghen, 212, 16. 

morweslep, sb., OM. morgen + slep ; 

morning sleef, 57, 14, 
mgst, moste, see mg, mot. 
mot, ptfrv., OE. mot-moste ; 7nay, 
must ; pr. sg, mot, 9, 14 ; moote, 
241, 20 ; pr,pL mdtenn (O), 13, 23 ; 
mote, 43, 24; pr.sbj. sg. mote, 13, 
31 ; pr, sbfpl. moten, 232, ii ; pt, 
sg. moste, 4, 20; most, 53, 17; 
pr. 2 sg. mgstist, 51, 7. 
mouote, mouhte, moun, muge(n). 
mountein, sb., OF. montaigne; moun- 
tain, lor, 14. 

mountduns, see montanoe. 
m6u]7e, mdWe(n), see mii]?, mnga(n) . 


mowe(n), stv., OE. mawan-meow 
(R) ; mow, cut down ; inf. mowen, 
176, 22. 

moroe, see muge(n). 
mowpe, see mn]?. 

Moyses, sb., OE. Moyses < Lat. ; 
Moses, 104, 22. 

muclie, muchel(e), mnclere, 
muohelere, see micel. 
mnchele(n), wkv., Sth. — Ml. mike- 
le(n) j OE. myclian ; enla7ge, hi- 
crease \ inf. miichelin, 194, 31. 
muge(n), ptprv., OM. *mugan- 
msehte, mihte (WS. meahte, mihte) ; 
have power, be able, MnE. i7iay, 
might', miigen, 22, 26; pr. 1, 
3 sg. mai, 3, 20; ma55 (O), 9, 10; 
maig, 16, 5 ; pr. 2 sg. mayht, 84, 21 ; 
pr.pl. mase, 41, 26 ; muse, 176, 23; 
mahen, 191, 18; miwen, 198, 29; 
mowen, 52, 23;_mouwe, 51, 3 £_; 
mdwe, 76, 29_; moun, 78, 31; mow, 
88, 13; mown^, 105, 25; pr. sbf. 
sg. muge, 17, 19 ; I, 3 mihte, 
I, 7 ; myhte, 3, 17 ; mihhte ( 0 ), 8, 
21; migte, 14, 17; micte, 75, 8; 
moncte, 75, 18; mouhte, 76, 13; pt. 
2 sg. miste, 38, 8; mist, 43, id; 
myhtes, 3, 25; mistest, 43, 12; 
mihtest, 183, 6 ; pt.pl, muhten, 6, 
8; mistten, 227, 25; pt. sbf. sg. 
muhte, 200, 7, ISt'h-.pt.sg. might, 
142,6; mycht, 166, 13 ; moht, 152, 
28; pt. pi. moghte, 144, 22. Sth. 
pr. I, 3 sg. mei, 176, 16. 
rniiln, sh., Sth. = Ml. miln (mill) ; 
OE. mylen, my In ; tnill ; ds. mlilne, 

201, I. 

multiplie(n), wkv., OF. multiplier; 
7}iultiply, prosper', inf. multiplien, 
100, 21, 

mun, see mune(n), 
mund, sb., OE. mund, mund,/i ; pi'o- 
lector, 184, 22. 

miinde, sb., Sth. — Ml. minde ; OE. 
(ge)mynde (mynde) ; me 7 nory, 77 ti 7 %d, 
199, I. 

mnneo, munek, monek, monk, OE, 
munuc (-ec) ; monk ; monek, 206, 
6; monke, in, 25; mnnk, 154, i ; 
pi. mtineces, i , 2 ; munekes, 4, 



GLOSSARY 


409 


I ; monkes, 75, 22 ; uioiiekes, 78, 

I. 

miinechene, OE., mynecen, /. ; 
nuUf 188, 27. ’ 

mune(n), -pipiv., OE. gemiman, 
munan-munde ; remej/iber^ think 
of I inf. mdne, remind^ 55, 12 ; fr. 
3 sg. mtinety, 32, 25; pr. sbf sg. 
mune, 33, 6 . Nth. pr. pi. mun, 
158, 32; man, 170, 19. 
munk, see munec. 

Muntfort, sb., OF. Mundford ; Mont- 
fort^ Simon of, 227, 2 j Ferres of, 
227, 6. 

murcISa, mure, see niire3pe, mor. 
murlrSen, murk^e, muxlJe, sec 
mire5pe. 

murrLe(u) ,W/?»!y.,OE.miirnan; nioicm^ 
inf. murnen, 21,17. Nth. ppl. 
mnmand, 133, 7. Cf. m6riie(n), 
mttrre, j/ 5 .,OF. moree ; dark red, nmU 
berry color, 231, 25. 
murye, see mirie. 

muj>, moup, mow]?,_£ 5 ., OE. muS; 
month, 13, 27; 102, 19; 

mowthe, 120, 5; mow'pe, 120, 7. 
eSth. ds. mirSe, 197, 14. 
muwen, see muge(n). 
my, see min. 

myoel, mych0(l), see micel. 
myehelnes, sb., OE. micelness, f. 

greatness, loi, 28. 
mycht, see mug0(n). 
myddel, ad/., OE. midla; middle, 
224, II. 

myght, myjt, muhte, see mijt, 
muge(n). 

mykeie, mykyle, see mioel. 
myldely, see mildelike. 
milder, see milde. 
myne(n), OE. mynian, mynnan; 
have in mind, think ttpon j Nth. 
inf, myn, 129, 30. 

mynstre, minster, sh., OE. mynster; 

minster, 1,3; minster, 7, 27. 
mynystyr, see ministre. 
myrSole, see miracle, 
myrthe, see mire^pe. 
mys, adv. ,ON. mis ; badly, amiss, 52,14. 
mysohaunoe, sb., OF. mescheance ; 
mischance, ill fortune, 91, 22, 


myscheif, see meschef. 
mysdede, see misdo(n), 
myselve, see self, 

mysfse, sb., OF. misaise ; misease, 
trouble, 1 18, 4. Cf. miseise. 
myssawe, sb., OE. *missagii or new 
cpd. ; eml speaking, 146, 29. 
mysse, mis, sb., ON. missa; loss, 
privation, iio, 30. Nth. mis, 
139. 5 - 

mysse(n), wkv., OE. missan; 7 ?iiss; 
inf, mysse, 232, 10. Nth, inf. mis, 
165, 13. 

mysseye(n), wkv., OM. *missecgan 
or new cpd. ; speak evil of, slander', 
pp. mysseyd, 97, 6. 
mysteir, see mester. 
mystise(n), wkv., OF. mesuser; mis- 
use ; pp. mysused, 235, 20. 
mytred, adj., OF. mitre + OE. ‘•ed(e); 
mitred, 229, 30. 


N. 

na, see nan. 

na, adv., OE. na, by shortening; 7 io, 

70 > 32. 

naam, see nime(n). 

nabbe(n), see nave(n). 

nacion, sL, OF. nacion(iin) ; nation, 

133, 3 i-_ 

nadre, nsevre, see neddxe, nfvre. 
nafd, naght, see naht, nave(n). 
na3le(n), nayle(n), wku., OE. nae- 
glian; nail', pp. na55ledd (O), 12, 
7 ; nayled, 60, ii. 

naht, adv., OE, nawiht, naht (naht) ; 
naught, not, 2, 6 ; naght, 97, 8 ; 

97, 31 ; nati^t, 100, 16. eSth, 
nawiht, 193, 23; nawt, 193, 17. 
Cf. noht. 

nai, nay, adv., ON. nei, cogn. with 
OE. na; nay, no, 25, 13; nay, 
107, 5 * 

naked, culj., OE. nacod ; naked, 16, 
23 ; nakit,^. 292. 
nalde, n&m, see wille(n), name, 
nam, see nime(n). 
name, nome, eME. name, sb., OE. 
nama; name, 13, 26. eSth. nome, 
191, 17. nam, 134, 24, 



410 


GLOSSARY 


namely, namelic, adv.j OE. nama 
+ ME. ly ; namely^ by name^ 91, 3 - 
ISrtli. namflic, 148, 4. 
namen, see nime(rL). 
namgre, namggre, adv,^ OE. na 
-f mara ; no mo7’e, 7iot at all^ 58, 19 ,* 
namggre, 239, 22. 

nan, na, adj^p-nt,^ eME., ISTth. — Mj. 
ngn; OE. nan ; 7ione, 710^ i, 7 » 

3j 22 ; gs. naness, 12, 32. eSth.. as. 
nanne, 179, 30; nenne, 200, 20. 
nar-we, nareu, narow, adj.^ OE. 
neani; 7iarrow,confmed^ small ^ 17, 

7; nareu, 3, narow, 222, 13. 

nas, see be(n). 

nat, nat, see naEt, wite(n). 
nathelfgs, adv.^ OE. na ])y (]>e) Iks; 

nevertheless 

napemg, adv.^ OE. na 0y (tSe) ma ; 7/0 
more, 206, 25. 

naping, prn,^ Kth. « Ml. ng]>ing; 

OE. nan ^Sing ; 7ioihingt 150, 29. 
nau5t, see naEt. 

nave(n), tc/X'Z'., OE. nabban < ne 
habban ; 7tot to have. ITth. pt. sg. 
nafd, 155, 6. Sth. pr, 2 sg. navest 
(eSth.), I94 j 10; 3 

(eSth.), i8q, 12; navety, 200, 25; 
pr. pi. nabbetJ, 179, 9. 
naver, navere, see nfvre. 
nav3, see nave(n). 
nawiEt (nawt), see nabt. 
nay, see nai. 

nayl, sb., OE. nsegl, nsegel ; 7iail, 86, 

28. 

nayl6(n), see na5le(n). 
ne, ni, Tug. pai-t., OE. ne ; not, i, 7 J 
ni, 178, 20. 
nfaver, see nfvre. 
neb, sL, OE. nebb; beak, face, 
41, 9. 

necessarie, sb., OF, necessaire, 
*necessairie ; necessary, 239, 19. 
ned, see nede. 

neddre, nadre, sb., OM. neddre, WS. 

adder, 1*1,2; pi. nadres, 
by shortening, 3, ^o. 
nede, sb., OM. ned, WS. nied, f. ; 
need, desire, 9, 4; ned (lor nede ?), 
18, 5. ©Sth. ds. neoden, 187, 20; 
neode, 199, 25. Kt. n^ed, %vj, 18 ; 


nyede, 211, 12; pL niedes, 211, 

13* 

node, adv., OM. nede, WS. niede ; 
necessarily, of necessity, 9, 17* 
need, 11% 21. _ 

nede(n), wkv., OM. nedan, \\S. 
niedan; force, compel, urge, to be 
necessary; pr. 3 sg. nedeS, iS, 23 ; 
nedelh, 119, 23. Sth. pr. 3 sg. 
neodeS (eSth.), 202_, 4; pr. pL 
nedeS, 201, 8 ; pp.ined, 201, H- 
nedes, nedys, adv., OM. nedeSj^W S. 
niedes ; of necessity, needs ; nedes, 
164, 4 ; nedys, 91, 24. 
nedful, a^’., OE. neod + ful ; full of 
need, necessitous, 7 tecessary, 24, 2; 
nedfull, 146, 20. 

nedi, adj., OAng. nedig, WS. nledig; 

needy, oppi'essed, 1 29} 2 1 . 
nedys, see nedes. 

nefe, sb., OE. nefa; nephew, r, 7 ;//. 

neves, 2, 25. 
nefen, see nevene. 
negge(n), neijeCn), whv., OM.gene- 
gan ; approach, draw near; inf. 
neggen, 17, 15 ; pr. 3 neije]), 65, 
13 ; /r. sbj. sg. negge, 14, 2. ITth. 
inf. negh, 141, .32. 

ne5bur, sb., OM. nehgebur, WS. 
neahgebur; fieighhour, 10 1, l*J. 
IS’th. neghteboure, I 47 j xpJ 
bour, 147, 24. Sth.i^/.neiheboures, 
202, II. 

negh, newest, see negge (n), neh. 
neghteboure, neghtbour, see ne3- 
bur. 

neh, nei, ni^, adJ. adv., OM. neh, 
WS. neah; 7iear (fiigh), i, 3; ni 5 , 
36, 13; wk. neie, 38, 16; neye 
{adv.), 84, 14; n}5, 62,2*1; comp. 
nere iadvl), nearly, no, 26 ; superl. 
next, 116, 23. lisrth, comp, neir, 
168, 32 ; superl. neghest, 129, 21 ; 
nexst, 128, 12; neist, 130, 27. Sth. 
n|h, 186, 31; nei, 206, 5; ny5, 
222, 24. 

nehleche(n), wkv., OM, nehlecan- 
lehte, WS. neahlKcan-lKhte; draw 
near, approach, 192, 21, 

nei, see neh. 

neidweis, adv., l?ytai.«Ml.p^dTOs; 



GLOSSARY 41 1 


OE. neod + wseg; of necessity^ 171, 

nei5e(n\ iiegge(n). 
neiJiebOTir, see ne^bur. 
neir, neist, see neb. 
neijjer, neytlier, mdef. OE. 

ne + ffig^er; neither^ 45,1 ; neyther, 
78, 29 ; neythyr, 109, 26. 
nekke, sb.^ OE. hnecca ; 7 ieck, 44, 31. 
nelle, nele, nolde, nalde, see 
wille, vb. 

nemne(,n), wkv*, OE.nemnan; name, 
call by name I fp. nemmnedd(^0), 1 1, 
4; nempnecl, 2 28, 29. Sth. 
inempnet, 191, 23. 
nenne, see nan. 

ITeod, Sanct, j/ 5 ., eMB. = Ml. Ned; 
OE. Neot ; St. N'eot's, Htmtmgdon-^ 
shire, 1,11. 

neode, neode(n), see nMe, nede(n). 
neomen, neore, see nime(n),be(n). 
nSre, nSren (n§re), see neh, b6(n). 
nerhand, adj., OE. near + hand ; 72 ear 
at haftd, 15 1 , 8. 

neruhliche, adv., Sth. = Ml. naru- 
llke; \VS. nearnlTce; ^larrowly, 
closely, carefully, 202, 5. 
nes, Sth.=:Ml. nas, see b©(n). 
nfse, sb., OE. neosu,/*. beside nosn, or 
possibly ON. nos,/. ; 7 tose, 14, 2. 
neste, sb., OE. nest ; 7 iest, 144, 26. 
nft (n§ft), sb., OKneat, 7 ieut. \ anv, 
ox, ficat (cattle) ; n^gt, 23, i ; n|t, 
86, 16, 

nevene, nefen, %vhv., ON. nefna, 
cogn. with OE. nemnan ; name, tell, 
relate", Ntb. inf nefen, 153, 25; 
pr. 3 s^. nevenes, 1^5, 27. 
never J?el^, adv., OK. nsevre ISs j 
nevertheless, 159, 15. 
neves, see nefe. 

nfvre, nevre,^navere, adv., OE. 
ncefre < ne wfre ; never, 3, 26 ; 
n»vre (eME.), 3, 5 ; nsevere (eME.), 
183, II ; nevre, 14, 13; never te, 
never yet, 213, 19; never )je later, 
notwithsta^iding, besides, 123, 9. 
Stb» naver, 181, 6; navere,iS2, 29; 
nfaver, 195, 31. 

newe, newee, adj., OE. niowe, OM. 
newe, WS. ntewe ; new j newaS; 4, 


15; newe, 16, i; as sb., new love, 
37, 14- Sth. nywe, 209, i. 
newe(n), whv., 0 ^ 1 . newan, WS. 
nlwian ; renew, restore ; iff. newe, 
125, II ; pr. 3 s^. newe' 5 , 15, 10; 
i 7 np. s£‘. newe, 18, 4, 
nexst (next, neye), see neh. 
neynde, neys, see nynde, be(n). 
neyther, neythyr, see neiper. 
ni, see ne. 

Nichomedes, sb., Lat. Nicomedes ; 
Nichomedes T, kin§^ of Biihytiia) 
gs. Nichomedes, 191, 23. 
nied, ni^, see ned, neh. 
nigen, nyne, adj., OE. nigon ; nine, 
33» 31; iiyne, 225, 2. 
nigentene, adj., OM. nigontene, WS. 

-tieno (tyne) ; 7 ii 7 icteen, 3, 21. 
nigt, niht, ni5ht, sb., OE. niht, 
night, 1, 15 ; nigt, 15, 18 ; nyjt, 47, 
25 ; nisht, 22^,12; pi. nihtes, 3, 3 ; 
nigtes, 33, 29; nigt, 33, 31 j niht, 
185, 5. 

nihtes, adv., OE. nihles ; at flight, by 
night, 203, 13. 

nime(n), siv., OE. niman-nom (4) ; 
take, seize ; betake ofieself, go ; mf 
nimen, 46, 30; nim, 57, 12 ; pr. 3 
sg, nime'd', 16, 15 ; />r. shj.sg. nime, 
226, i6; pt. sg. nam, 2, 24; num, 
40, 24; naam, 213, 7; pt. pi. 
namen, 2, i ; nome, 65, 22 ; pt. sbj. 
sg. nome, 50, 26; pp. namen, 22, 
0 ; nome, 53, 7. Sth. wf neomen 
(eSth.), 193, 2 ; pp. innme, 1S3, 2; 
indme, 42, 30. 

Ninian, sb,, OE. Ninias, Ninian; 
Ninias, 221, 30. 

Ninive, sb.-, Lat, Nineve ; Nuiez^eh, 
73» 28. 

nis, niste, see be(n), wite(n). 
nip, nipe, sb., OE. nl'6 ; coniefiiioft, 
envy, 'malice, 9, 24; nip?, 54, 
15. 

nilSer, adv., OE. ni'^Jor ; downwaf'ds, 

3. 

nipful, adj., OE. nipful; etmous, 9, 
25 - 

ng (noan), see ngn. 
ng, adv., OE. n5 ,* not, not at all, 35, 
24. 



412 


GLOSSARY 


n§ble, ngbyll, adj.^ OF. noble; 
nobU, 73, 24; ngbyll, 105, 21; 
ngbill, 139, 5. 

ngbleye, OF. noblei; splendor^ 
gf-andeur^ 210, 7* 
nocht, see nolit. 

ISToe, sb., Lat. Noe; Noah^ 7 h ^ 5 ; 
gs. Noes, 72, I. 

11956(11), ptprv ., OE. ne + agan-ahte; 

onghi not ; pK 2 sg. nostest, 44, 20. 
nogt (no3t, aoght), see nobt. 
nogtest, see 11956(11). 
iig5wer, adv., OE. ne ahwer ; no- 
wherSi 59, 28. 

nobt, nogt, noglit, no3t, nou^t, 
nout, adv,^ OE. nawiht, naht, 
nobt ; nought, not, i, 8 ; noliht (O), 

9, 16; nogt, 17, 15 ; nou^t, 57, 8; 
noTit, 14, 9 ; nowt, 82, 22 ; no3t, 
208, 17. Krth. noght, 128, 14. 

noise, sb,, OF. noise; noise, 198, 
27. 

nok, sb,, Ir. nine ? ; nook, corner*, fer- 
Jiyng noke, value of a farthing, 96, 

8 . 

nolde, see wille, vb. 
nome, noni(6), see name, nim6(n), 
ngme, sb,, ON. nam, or peih. OM. 
’•‘nooi ; seizure, pledge, hostage, 28, 
12. 

nomecui$e, adj., OE. nameu^y ; re^- 
nowned, 197. 8. 

nozneliche, adv,, OE. nama (ngma) + 
lice; namely, 199, 17. 
ngn, ng, adj., OE. nan; none, no*, 
ngn, 16, 5 ; nggn, 212, 23 ; ng, 29, 

10. eSth. noan, 226, 16. Cf. 
nan. 

non, sh,, OE. non; noon, 200, 3; 
noone, 109, 2. 

nontid, sb*, OE. nSntid ; noontide, 5, 
14. 

n99n, noone, see ngn, non. 
n99iLys, sb. < adj,, OE. anes < ^ ; 
nonce, occasion, in phr. for the 
nggnys, 1 13, 9. 
nggt, see wite(n). 

ngr, adv., OE. nah'ttrjetyer, nawtier, 
natter; nor 49, 22. 
noriss0(n), v)^,, OF. niirrir, nunss ; 
nourish', pt, sg, norissed, 101, 2, 


ITorman, adj., sb., OF. Norman, cf. 
OE. Norjimann ; JVbmnan; //.Nor- 
mans, 2 c 6, 19; Normannes, 209, 

3. 

Normandi, Normandye, sb., OF. 
Normandl; Normandy, i, 19, Nor- 
mand3^e, 158, 2. 

norti, north, adv., OE. nortJ; north, 
16, 26; north, 55, 21. 
Northampton, OE. Nortyhamttin ; 

Northampton*, John, 233, 2. 
norperon, adj., OE. nortene ; north- 
e 7 m, 224, II, 

Northfolk, sb., OE. Nor?Sfolc; Nor- 
folk; ds. Northfolke, 227, 3. 
Norpthumberlond, sb., OE. Nor 5 - 
hymbraland (Ignd) ; Northujnber- 
land, 221, 32. 

Norpiimbre, sb., Sth.= Ml. Norji- 
himbre ; OE. NorShymbre, pi. adj.; 
Northumbrian; pi. Norjiiimbres, 

22^) 23. 

Norwic, Norwyche, sh., O.E. Nor??- 
wlc; Norwich, 4, 29; Norwyche, 
116, 19. 

ngtarS^e, sb., OF. notarle ; notary, 
94, 10. 

note = nute, sb., OE. hnutu ; nut, 
77, 22. 

notful, adj., OE. notu + ful ; useful, 
advatiiageotts, 133, 15. 
ngpelfs, ng?Selfas, adv. conj., OE. 
na jy l«s ; nevertheless, 88, 7. e Sth, 
ngSelfase, 199, 31. 
ngper, see nouther. 
ngping, sb., OE. nan + Jjing ; nothing, 
‘3S, 

nou (now), see nn, noht. 
noughtwithstgndyng, p 7 'ep. adv., 
OE. nawiht + wi?yst9nding ; 7 iot- 
withstanding, 232, 26. 
nougt, see noht, 

noumber, OF, nombre ; number, 
164, 14. 
nout, see noht. 

nouther, ngper, prn. conj., OE. 
nahwse^Jer, nawtJer; neither, dial, 
navbther, 3, 32 ; noy])er, 58, 12 j 
nowthire, 147, 2; nowtier, 194, 3; 
ngjjer, 209, 2. 
noW, see nu. 



GLOSSARY 413 


ngwiderwardes, ach.y OE. naliwicler 
+ wardes ; no whither^ in 7w direc- 
Hon, 3, 17. 

ngwor, adv,, OM, namver, WS. hwcer; 

nowhere, 15, 7. 
nowt, see noEt. 

now^er (nowthire, noyper), see 
n outlier. 

noye(n), wkv., OF. anoier ; minoy, be 
troub/esome; pnpl. noye, 147, 22. 
nUj ndu, adv, conj,, OK nu ; 7iow, 4, 
28 ; smce, 30, 25 ; nou, 49, 7 ; now, 
89, 30- 

Hubie, si., OF. Noble ; Nttbia, 42, 
27, 

niil (niilt), see wille, vL 
nute (uuste), see wite(n), 
numen, see iiime(n). 
nujje, uupen, adv., OE. nu ])a ; 710W 
then, 710W, 37, 30; nuj)en, 195, 30. 
ny, nyce, see neh, nyse. 
nyed(e), see ned. 
nygh., nyat, see neh, niht. 
nygun, so., based on Scand. *hniggii, 
cf. ON. hnoggr, ‘ niggardly ' ; 7iig- 
gard, 88, 24. 

nynde, neynde, adj., OE. nigo’^^a, 
mod. by ON. niundi? ; nmih, 147, 
23; neynde, 152, 9. 
nyne, see nigen, 

nyse, nyoe, adJ., OF. nice; nice, 121, 
9* 

nyste, nyte, see wite(n). 
nywe, see newe. 


O. 

znte7j., OE. a ; 0, oh, 66, 9. 

9 (99)7 OE. a ; ever} ay and 99, 
ever and aye, 56, 26. 

6, g^o, see on, §n, of. 
obout, see abuten. 
oc, adv., OE. ac (oc); btd, i, 8, Cf. 
ao. 

oooean, sb., OF. occean; ocean, 

320, 8. 

ocoupie(n), wkv., OF. occuper ; 
occupy ; Sth. mf. occupTe, 221, 13; 
pt. pi. occupiede, 221, 35; 
occupied, 223, 14. 


Octgbre, sb., OF. Octobre; October, 
226, 22. 

of, off, o, prep, adv., OE. of; of, 
frofjt, off, I, 2 ; off (O), 8, 22 ; 
o, 38, 6. 

ofdrede(n), stv., OM. ofdredan 
(WS. drffidan)-dred (R); frightezi, 
terrify', pp. ofdred, i, 17. Sth. 
pp. ofdrgd, 177, 19; //. ofdredde, 
179, 5- 
off, see of. 

offere(n), wkv., OE. offrian ; offer ; 

iftf offeren, 117, 2. 
o£fere(n), wkv., OM. *offeran, WS. 
*offKran; frighten off', pp. offerd, 

36, 27. 

office, sb., OF. office ; office, 233, 25 ; 

offis, 22, 7; offys, ri8, 10. 
officer, ofifycer, sb., OF. officier; 
officer, 233, 30 ; pL offyceres, 117, 
29. 

cffis, offte, see office, ofte. 
offyc§r, off!ys, see officer, office, 
ofrand, sb., OF. offrende; offering, 
185, 16- 

ofrigt, pp. as adj., OE. afyrht, 
’•‘afryht < afyrhtan ; affrighted, 21, 
14. 

ofsende(n), wkv., OE. ofsendan 
(sendan) ; se7td for, sunwwi ; mf. 
ofsefide, 204, 20. 

ofservie(n), wkv., OE. of + OF. ser- 
vir ; Sth. = Ml. ofserve(n) ; deserve, 
merit', pr.pl. ofserve]), 214, 21. 
ofslf(n), stv., Sth. =s Ml. ofsl9(n) ; 
OE. ofsl|an-‘SloIi(g) (6) ; stTdke off, 
kill, slay; pt. sg. ofsldh, 188, ii; 
pp. ofsla^e, 190, 3. 
ofspring, sb., OE. ofspring ; offspring, 
25, 22. Nth. oxspring ~ osspring, 
130, 21. 

ofte, offte, often, adv., OE. oft; oft, 
often; offte (O), 9, 17; oftyn, 98, 
18 ; offte sij)e, see ofte5i?ye(n). 
oftesi'tSe(n), adv., OE. oft + sI?5an; 
ofitimes, often; oftesItJen, 203, 9; 
offte sl^e (O), 12, 9, Cf. oft- 
slpys(es). 

ofj)inche(n), wkv., OE. oftJyncan- 
ISuhte (Suhte); displease; repent; 
pr. 3 sg. of])mciiet, 176, lo. 



414 


GLOSSARY 


oftsipys, oftesythes, adv,^ OE. oft + 
sl^Ses; of it hues y often \ oftesjthes, 
144, 19. Cf. oftesipe(n). 
ofttyme, adv., OE. oft + lima; oft- 
times, 235, 5. 
oftyn, see offcs. 

of^ndre(n), OE. ofvvunclrian; 
become astonished \ pf. ofwundrccl, 
1, 16. 

gg, 95 e(n). 

o^ain, ogayn, ogayno, see agein. 
o5ains (o^ayns), see agaynes. 
953(3^)5 9 S 3 (J^)> owe;n), plfrv., 
OE. agan-ahle ; have, possess, 
own‘, owe, ought', pr, i, 3 sg. gg, 25, 
27; ouh, 198, I ; ^eg pr. 3 sg. 
owyth, 1 13, 30; pr.pU owen, 199, 
16; owe, 236, 13; ouvvese, 199, 25; 
pt. sg. 03te, 43, 8. Cf. age(n). 
95011, owen, oun, adj., OE. agtn; 
o%vn\ eMl. aslienn, ir, 12;^ oun, 
223, 29; wk oime, 50, 26; §5ene, 
38, 12. eSth. ase, I 77 » 
aline, 193, 9;/*- asere, 183, 3. 
c5t (a5t), out, hidef prn., OE. 
awiht, aht, oht; ought {aught), 
anything, 38, 6; ouclit, I74> 
out, 202, 26. Cf. a3t. 
o3te, see 933(12). 

oht, adj,, OE. aht; brave, valiant, 
i8r, I. 

okerere, sb., ON. okr, cogn. with 
OE. wocor + OE. -|re (ere); usurer, 
88, 22; pL okerers, 83 , i. 
okeryngjj’iJ., ON. okr, cogn. with OE. 

wocor + ME. -ing ; ustery, 88, 12. 
okyre, sb., ON. okr, cogn. with OE. 

wocor; usiery, 147, 16. 
gld, ad/., OM. aid, aid, WS. eald; 
old, 16, 14; ggld, 240, 17 ; comp.pl. 
eldere, 33, 13. eSth. cotnp. elder, 
1 7 < 5 , 1 ; pi. eldeme, 206, 25. Cf. aid. 
olhnunga, sb., OE. oleccung, 
*olehnnng, /! ; soothing, caressing, 
gentle7iess, 193, 26. 
olle, sb., OE. olie; oil, 34, ii. 
olle — uUe = wuUo, see wille, vb. 
oluline(n), wJw., Sth. = Ml. 
olihne(n) ; cf. OE. oleccan ; flatter', 
inf. oliihnen, 202, 32. 
omang, see amang. 


on, g, gne, adj., OE. an; one, 21, ii; 
eME. as. gnne, 3, 15; ds. gne, 43, 
25; 9ne, 89, 5 ; gn, 25, 19; g, 43, 
9; ton (<])at ga), 26,4; (§,90, 
31. Cf. an (a) and the 1 educed 
forms an, a. 

on, 6, prep, adv., OE. on ; on, in, 
with, I, 12; o, 3, 28; onn (O), 9, 
27 ; one, 40, 22. 

gnde, sb., OE. anda, gnda; indigna- 
iion, malice, 54, 15. 
gnde, sb., ON. andi, cognate OE. 

anda, ‘envy’; breath, 19, 9. 
onderstand, see understande(n). 
one, gne, see on, gn. 
gnelepi, see gnlepy. 
gnes, gnis, adv., OE. an + es; once\ 
gnys, iir, 13: with at, at one, 
together, ht fellowship ; al gnes, for 
al at gnes, wholly at one, united, 
239, 34 - 

oneste, honests. 
on3gn9s, see a5enes. 
oni, onie, see ani. 

gnlepy, sb., OM. anlepig, "WS, 
anllepig; smgle, sole, 215, ii. 
onli ve, adv., OE. on + ds. life ; alive, 
86, 10. Cf. lif. 

gnly, gnlych, adv., OE. anllce ; only, 
94» 32 ; gnlych, 94, 24. 
gnne, onn, see gn, on. 
onneaJ>3, onoh, see unfpe, inoh. 
ongn, adv., OE. on ^ ; afzoft, at 
once, 26, 7» 

onont, adv., OE. on-efn ; by, near, 
193, 25. 

onsage, sh., OE. onsagii, accusa- 
tion, charge against a person ; pi. 
onsagen, 21, 9. 
onstad, see onstedefn). 
onstfde(n), slv., OE. *onstedan"- 
slEcd, or ON. ste? 5 ja~stadd (5) ; 
stand, stand by ; pt. sg. onstad, 
132, 26. 

onswere, see answere. 
onsweri0(n), see answere(n). 
ontful, adj., OE. ’“andful, gndful; 
envious, 199, 18, 

onworJ)3(n), whv., OE. un- 

weor6ia(n) ; disdain, dishonor, 

despise', t>nworJ?ede, 216, 18. 



GLOSSARY 


415 


9iiys, pgnys, see gnes. 

99k = 9k, sd., OE. ac ; oa^j 242, 2. 
ggld, 99tli, see gld, gp, 
ootlier, see gper. 

9pene(n), 9pne(n\ w/cv., OE. 
openian; open\ inf. oppnenn (O), 
12, 26; gpenen, 199, 29; imp.pl. 
9peiie]), 10 1, 19; pt. s^. opened e 
(eME.), 195, 32; gpenede, 02, 15. 
ITth. inf. oppyn, 174, 30. 
gpenlic, adj.^ OE. openlic ; open, 
conspicuous, 153, 28. 
gpenlico (eME. openlics), gpen- 
lxoh.3, gpenlik, gpenly, adv., OE. 
openlice ; openly, 4, 8. ITtli. 
gpenllk, I31, 29; gpenly, 154, 28. 
Sth. gpenllche, 217, 17. 
opon, oppnenn, upon, 9pens(n). 

oppression, sb., OF. oppression ; 

oppressio 7 t, 232, 22. 
oppyn, see rpene(n). 
opwoxe(n), wkv., OE. *iipweaxan ; 
StE. ” Ml. upwaxe(n) ; grow np, 
increase*, pr. pi. opvvexej), 219, 3. 
or, see gper. 

gr, gre, adv. prep., ON. 5 r, cognate 
OE. ser, ‘ere’; ere, before, 16, X4 ; 

97, 23; superl. grest, 21, 25. 
orchard, sh., OE. orceard < ort + 
geard ; orchard, 109, 8. 
ord, sh., OE. ord, orcl ; hcglmiing, 
45, 31. eSth. ds. orcle, 178, 29. 
crdeine(n), ordeigne(n), ordan, 
wkv., OF. ordeiner; ordain, order*, 
pt. pi. ordeinede, 205, 28; pp. 
ordeyned, 117, 10; ordeigned, 236, 
27. ITth. inf. ordan, 138, i8;//. 
sg. ordand, 143, 9; pt.pl. ordaned, 

crdenaunce, sb., OF. ordenance ; 
ordering, arj*angement ; ordy- 
naunce, 233, 14; pi. ordenaunce, 
1 17, 19; ordenaimces, 116, 20. 
ordere, sb., OF. ordre ; 07 *der, 

religious order, 120, 30; ordyre, 
144, 14. 

ordeyjae(n), see ordeine(n). 
oXdynaUhoe, see ordenaunce. 
ordyr^, gre, see orders, gr. 
gre, sb., OE. Sr,/.; oar*, pi. gres, 86, 
27. 


gre, sh., OE. ar, f. ; favor, grace, 63, 
10. 

oresiin, see orison, 
erf, sb., OE. orf; cat Ik, inhe^diance, 
property, 30, 32. 

original, sb. adj., OF. original ; 

origin, original, 238, 18. 
origt, adv., OE. on riht; aright, 
27, 2. __ 

orisun, orisoun, sh., OF. orisun ; 
prayer, orison ; oresun, 40, 5 ; ori- 
soiine, 140, 4. 

ormete, adj., OM. ormete, WS. 
ormKte ; immense, immeasurable, 
5 , 5 * 

Orman, sh., ON. Orm, cogn. with. 
OE. weorm, wyrra; Ormm, Orm\ 
Orrmln (O), 13, 26. 
orn, gt, see urne(n), wite(n). 

§>> 99^E, sh., OE. a 5 ’; oalh, 77, 

22; gth, 78, 10; 99th, 240, 12. 
eSth. ds. 9]3e, 226, 15. 

9j>er, or, er, conj., Oli, aghweetJer, 
iiw'Ser, eME, ou6er; or; o]err( 0 ), 
23, 2S; or, 51, 10; er, 17, 19; 

or . . . or, either . . . or, 21,9, KTth, 
owlhire, 144, 2 ; onthire, 144, 15. 

oper, oother, opor, adj,, OE. oper; 
other, second, i, 18; oother, 240, 
1; opor, 219, 22; toper (< pat 
oper), 77, 14; tothire, 145, 25; 

pi. opie, I, 5; t66ere, 30, 20. 
eSth- gs. Stores, 177, 6. 

d^erhwules, adv., OE. o 5 er + hwTl, 
IWS. hw3l, at ajiol/ier tifne, 199, 23. 
ouoht, see pu, c3t. 
ouer, ouh, see ure, g3e(n'). 
oule, sb., OE. awiil(el),/. j awl ; pi. 

oules, 6r, 24. 
oun, ^iine, see g5e(n). 

(cure), ous, out, see hre, io, ojt. 
outcaste(n), i,vkv., OE. ut + ON, 
kasta; outcast*, pp. outcast, 238, 29. 
oute, duterlicho, see uto, outrely. 
oupe, see unnc(n). 
ouner, outJire, see g?Ser. 
outrfiSe, sh., OF. outrage < ultrage ; 
^outrage, excess, 134, o. 
outrel^, adv., OE. utor + Hce; out- 
wardly, utterly, to the uttertnosi, 
244, 21. Sth. outerliche, 234, 26. 



4i6 


GLOSSARY 


ou-we, sb,, OE. eowu; ewe, 53, 4. 
ou-we, see §50 (n). 

OTiwer, see )>u. 

§ver, eME. over (ofer), p^ep, adv., 
OE. ofer ; ffver\ over (eME.) ,1,13; 
over, 237, 12. mil. gvr, 174, 9. 
overall, gveral, adv.^ OE. ofer + OM. 
Nth. al ; (yver all, wholly, every- 
where, 136, 12 ; gveral, 202, 2. 
gvercunie(n), siv., OE. ofercuman- 
com (4); overcome \ pr. sbj. sg. 
gveraim, 102, 4 ; pi. sg. gvercome, 

207, 6; pp. gverciimen, 23, 12; 
gveicome, 206, 23. 

overggCn), anv., OE. ofergan-eode ; 
“ go over, overcome ; inf. gverggn, 
28, 30. 

gverlieghe(n), wko., OAng. *ofer- 
hean; raise too high\ Nth. pp. 
gverheghede, 143, 27. 
gverkulS, adj., OE. *ofercutJ i/ami/iar; 
comp. gverkutSre, too familiar, 200, 
22. 

gverlop, sh., ME. gver + Scand. * 16 p ; 
cf. MLG. overlSp, cogn. with OE. 
*oferhleap ; omission, skipping, 155, 
28. 

gverlyttill, adv., OE. *oferlytel ; too 
little, 144, 15. 

gvermany, adj., OE. *ofermanig; 

very many, over many, 235, 12. 
gvermast; adj., OE. ofer + mast; 

overmost, outer, 140, 12. 
gvermekill, adv., OE. ofermicel, acl/., 
overmuch, too muJi, 144, 15. 
gvemon, sh., OE. ofemoii : afternoon, 

208, 24. 

gverrenneCn), rmne(n), stv , OE. 
ofer + ON. renna (rinna) (3) ; over- 
run, i-un over, 7'ecount ; Nth. inf. 
gverrin, 130, 8 ; pr. 3 sg. gverrenncs, 
I34» 26. 

§v0rse(n), siv., OE. oferseon-seah 
(5); observe, see, care for\ eME. 
pr. 3 sg, oversih??, 178, 19; pt. sg. 
oversah, 181, 16. 

gverskyle, adv,, OE, ofer + ON. 
skil ; beyond reason, without reason, 
96, 23. 

§irertake(n), stv,, OE. ofer + ON. 
taka-tok (6) ; overtake ; pr. 3 sg. 


gvertaketJ, 29, 25 ; pt. sg. gvyrtoke, 
1 1 3 j 2 • 

overlSogt, pp. as adj., OE. *ofer- 
?yencean-0ohte (?yohte) ; amazed, 
stupefied, 26, 27. 

overwende(n), wkv., OE. ofer- 
" wendan, wendan; turn over, go 
over\ pt, sg. gverwente, 28, 29. 

§vr, see gver. 
gvyrtoke, see gvertoke. 
dw, oway, see pu, awai. 
owe(n)^<?^ 

dwer (duwer, oure), see 

gwer, adv., OM. ahwer, VVS. ahvvser; 

everywhere, anywhere, 3, 31; 4, 2. 
owhen, see §50(11). 
owthire, onthire, see gper. 
owyth, see §3e(n). 

0X0, sb., OE. oxa; ox, 57, 24. 
Oxeneford, sb., OE. Oxenaford; 

Oxford, 2, 24; ds. Oxenforde, 8, 5. 
oxspring, see ofspring. 
oyle, oyl, sb., OF. oile; oil, 65, 7, 
Nth. oyle, 143, 12; oyl, 143, 15- 
oys, sb., OF. use, uise; use, 147, io.‘ 


P. 

pade, sb., 0ME. — Ml. pade ; ON. 
padda ; frog, toad ; pi. pades, 3,10. 

paon, adj. sb„ OF.paien; pagan •, pL 
paens, 213, i8. 

page, sh., OF. page; page, 98, 25, 

pai©(n), paye(n), wkv., OF. paier; 
satisfy, pay ; inf. payen, 1 17, 5 ; /A 
paide, 212, 15; pp. paied, 26, 
23; payd, 91, 13; paid, 141, 23. 

pain©, see peyn©. 

pais, OF. pais, jDes; peace, 2,4. 
Cf. pfs. 

paisible, adj., OF, paisible; peace- 
able, 232, 25. 

pal, sh., OE. psell, Lat. pallium ; pall, 
costly cloth, 38, 24 ; pi. palles, 46, 6. 

palais, sb., OF. palais ; palace, 42, 5. 

pale, adf., OF, pale ; pale, 241, 9. 

palefrey, sb., OF. palefreid ; palfrey, 
saddle-horse*, //. palefreys, 48, 23. 

pape, sb., ©MB., Nth. — Ml* p§pe; 
OE. papa ; pope, 4, i8. 



GLOSSARY 417 


Paradis, Paradys, sd,, OF. Paradis 
(Parais) ; Paradise, 64, 10. 

Parais, sb,, OF. Parais (Paradis) ; 
Para(^c, 19S, I3. 

paramour, sb., OF. par amour, adv» 
phr.\ leaver, jia^'amour, 128, 19. 
paramur, adv., OF. par amur 
(amour) ; as a lover, passionately, 
37 » 6 . 

parauntre, see peraventure. 
pardee, hiterj.^ OF. par + de(u) ; par- 
dee, 239, 10. 

pardon, sb., OF. pardon; pardon, 
134, 20. 

paresche, sb., OF. paroclie ; parish, 
119, 22. 

Paris, Pariss, sb., OF. Paris ; Paris, 
206, 27 ; Pariss, 163, 9. 
parlement, sb., OF. parlement ; par^ 
liament, assembly, 207, i. 
parlur, sb., OF. parloir, infl. by -lir 
woi ds ; parlor,^ reception room ; pi. 
parlures, 197, 18. 

part, sb., OF. part ; part, 38, 10. 
parte(n), wkv., OF. parter; part', 
inf. parten, 65, 15;^. 2 .r^.partest, 
241, 23 ; pr. 3 sg. parte??, 198, 2 ; 
imp. pi. parte]?, loo, 8. 
partener, sb. , OF, parcener, infl. by 
part ; part?zer; pi. parteners, 225, 
22. 

parting, ppL as parten ; OF. 

partir ; parting, 43? 1 4* 
party, sb., OF. parti ; party, side ; on 
]>e tg party, on the one side, 90, 31. 
part^, A, OF. partie ; part, portion ; 
a party, in part; partly, in some 
measure, 93, 14. 
pas, see passe(n). 

pas, sb., OF, pas j pass, pace, passage; 
92, 20. 

pas::oin), whv., OF. passer; pass; 
inf. passen, 105, 4; 3 passetb, 
3397 sg. passe, 103, 3; 

pp. passid, 53, 6. JTth. inf pas, 
i36j 21 ; pr. pl. passes, 144, 24; pL 
pi. passit, 109, 21; pp. past, 133, 
20; passit, 167, 18. pr. pi. 
pa^e]>, 223, 19 ; pp. ypased, a 16, 
22. 

passilm, passioun, ^3., OF. passiiin ; 


passion, death, martyrdom, 40, 6 ; 
passioun, 139, 15. 

pastee, sb., OF. pa:ate ; pasty , pasliy ; 
pi. pastees, 84, 24. 

pasture, sb., OF. pasture ; food, pas- 
ture, I or, 2. 

paternoster, sb., Lat. pater noster ; 

Zonfs prayer, 16, 25. 
patriarc]ie,j3,, OF.patriarche; patri- 
arch ; pL patriarches, 212, 32. 
patriark, sb., Lat. patriarchus ; patri- 
arch, 77, 31. 

Paul, see Powel, 

pay, sb., OF. paie ; satisfaction, 
120, 14; pleasure, 50, 18. 
payen (payd), see paie(n). 
payne, see peyne. 

pece, sb.,0'F. piece ,* piece; pi. paces, 
62, I. 

p§f s, see p§s. 

peir, sb., OF. pair ; pair ; i^sir?, 39, 

23* 

Peitou, sb., NF. Peitowe, OF. Poi- 
towe ; Poitou, 7, ii. 
peler, sb., OF. pilleur; robber, i6r, i. 
peltyer, sb., OF. iDeletier; furrier, 
116, 18. 

penaunoe, penance, penans, sb., 
OF. penance ; penance, suffering, 
5(), 27; penance, 147, 26; penans, 
1577 4 ; penonce, 218, 4. 

Penoryeli, sb. , Welsh ? ; Pencrych, 
Richard, 224, 29. 

peni, penie, OE. pening, penig; 
penny, 86, 21 ; peme, 178, ii ; pi. 
penes, 88, 25 ; pens, 118, 6. 
penonce, see penaunce. 
peoddare, sb. , cf, %\c&^t,Etym. Diet., 
pedlar; pedlar, Sch. peddir, 198, 
27. 

people, peple, pepul, pople, sb., 
OF. pueple; people, 320, ii ; pepul, 
119, 12; pepuUe, 125, 7; pople, 
74, a ; pupie, 139, ii. StE, people, 
220, II. 

peraventure, paraxmtre, adv., OF. 
par aventure ; perchance, 104, 7 ; 
parauntre, 205, 6. 

pfre, sb., OE. pere(u); pear, 127, 19. 
pdr9, sb., OF. per; peer, equal, 139, 
29. 


E e 



4i8 


GLOSSARY 


perel, peril(l), OF. peril? peril, 
93, 10. 

peirfay, adv., OF. per fei? through 
faith, hy my faith, 167, 3. 
perfeecyone, sb,, OF» perfeccion ; 

perfection, 146, 21. 
perili^l), see perel. ^ , 

perisse(n), OF. perirj pr, ind. 
periss- ; perish ; inf. perissen, 100, 
3 5. S til. pr.pL perisset « perisse]), 
211, 5; pr* sbj, pi, perissi, 211, 
33. 

Perres, Pers, sb., OF. Peres, Peis; 
Pierce, 88, 18 ? gs, without ending, 
89, 14; Perres, 227, 4. 
persav’e(n), wkv., llsTtli. = M 1 . per- 
ceve(n) ; OF. perceiver ; pei ceive ; 
pt. sg. persavit, 167, 23. 
persev0re(2i), wku,, OF. perseverer; 
persevere \pr, 3 sg. persevereth, 238, 

persone, sb,, OF. persone; person, 

pertei^*^z^z'., OF. (a)pert + ME. 1 ^; 

quickly, boldly, iii, 20. 
pgrtre, sb,, OE. pere(u) + treo ; pear^ 
tree^ 127, 19. 

pfs, pfse, sb,, AN. pes, OF, pais; 

peaces pgse, iii, 21 ; p§§s, 333, 4. 
pestilence, sb., OF. pestilence ; 

lence, 239, 17. 
pete, see pite. 

Peter, sb,, OF. Peter ; Peter, 116, 23 ; 
gs. Petres, i, 12. 

peyne, paine, OF . peine ; penalty, 

pain, 1 1 7, 13; payne, 138, 28;//. 
paines, 74, 24 ; paynes, 137, 20. 
peynelile, adj. adv,, OF. peineble; 

careful, carefully, 95, 30.^ 
peynte(n), wkv., OF. peint, pp. to 
peindre ; paint, decorate. Sth. pp. 
ipeynted, 49, 3 ; ypeynt,^22i, 10. 
peynted, adj. < pp., OF. pemt < 
peindre; painted, 221, ii. 
peyntynge, sb,, based on OF. peint, 
pp. of peindie ; painting, 221, 7. 
poys, sb., NF. peis, OF. pois; weight, 
91, 26. 

peyse(ii), wkv,, NF. peiser, OF. 
poiser; weighs balance \ peyse, 
88, 16. 


Pharan, sh., Lat. Pharan ; Paran, 
3 .*ij 9 * 

Phiraon, -iin, sh., OF, Pharaon, AN. 
Pliaraun ; Pharaoh, 22, i; Pharaun, 

Pliiiip,Pilip,jA, OF. Philip; Philip, 
158, 29; Filip, 159, 21. 
philosgphe, sb., OF. philosophe; 

philosopher, 216, 17. 
pich, sb., OE. pic ; pitch, 62, 17. 

Piet, sb,, OF. Piet, OE. Peoht, Pihtj 
Pict\ pi. Pictes, 220, 7. ^ 
pik, sb., OE. pic; pike, spike, 61, 16. 
pike(n), wkv., ON. *pika, cogn. with 
OE. pician ; cover with pitch, pitch ; 
inf. pike, 86, 23. 

Pilate,.?^., OF. Pilate; Pilate, 137, S. 
pile, sb., OF. pel ; skin, peek, pile 
and pi]?, peel a 7 id pith, i. e, outside 
and inside, 50, 13. 

piler, sb. , OF. piler ; pillar, 40, 23 ; 
pyler, 122, 30. 

pilerinage, sb., OF. pelerinage; pil- 
grimage, 230, 21. 

pilgryme, sb., OF. pelegTiii;/z7^>7i, 
229, 16. 

pilte(ii), wkv., OE. *pyltan < Lat. 
pultare ? ; push, thrust, k^iock, pelt ; 
pp. pilt, 26, 22. 

pine, pin, sh., OE. *pln; cf. OE. 
pinung, pinness, or ON. pina ? ; 
torture, pain ; pin, 53, 6 ; //.pines, 
3, 20. Sth. pi, pinen, 197, 7. 
pine(n), wkv., OE. pinian ; torture, 
suffer pain \ pt. pi, pined, 3, 4; 
pineden, 4, 30 ; pp. pined, 3, 5 ; 
pyned, 138, 24. Nth. pr. 3 sg, 
pinnes, 1 50, 5. Sth. inf, pinie, 180, 
20. 

pining, sh,, OE. pinung, -ing; torture, 
3 , 5 - 

pinnes, pme;n). 

pit, pite, sb., OE. pytt; ///, 63, iS ; 

pite, 50, 8 ; pi, pittes, 1 5 2, 12. 
pite, sb,, OF. pitee; pity, 38, 17; 

pyle, iq6, 9. Nth. pete, 136, 27. 
pip, sb,, OE. pi6a; pith, 50, 13. 
pittes, see pit. 

place, sb,, OF. place ; place, 87, 28, 
plai, sb,, OE. plega ; joy, happiness, 
6 ., 



GLOSSARY 


4^9 


plaine, OF. pkine ; plahi, level 
country^ i6o, 3. 

plante(n), wkv., OE. plantian, OF. 
planter ; plant ; pf. plantede, 4, 

25- 

plate, sb., OF, plate; p late ^ piece \ 
pL plates, 31, 18. 

playinge, sh,^ based on plegen ; play- 
215, 22. 

playne, atlj\, OF. plain : flat^ even^ 
elear, 162, 31. 

play nil, aciv,, OF. plain, acl/. and 
adv . ; plainly^ clearly j certainly, 
135, 21. 

plenerly, adv,, OF. plemer + ME. 1 > ; 
fully, 96, 7. 

pleute, OF. plente; plenty, 101, 

12, * pleiitee, 243, 15 

pl|se(n), OF. plaisir; please \ 

p>\ sbj\ s^., plfse, 1 19, 17. 

Plesseiz, sb., OF. Plesseis ; Plessts, 
Jghan of, 227, 5 - 

pl0ye(n), wkv., OE. plegan ; play, 
pi\ pi. plc'yen, 237, ii. 
pleyne(u), %vlcv., OF. plaindre ; com- 
plain ; inf pleyne, 23S, 30 ; pt, sg. 
pleyned, 233, 27. 
pleyt, see plight, 
plight, see ply;te(ii). 
plight, sb,, OE, plight ; plight, 
trouble, 134, 22 ; pleyt, 60, 7. 
plihtful, adj., OE. pliht + ful ; dajt- 
gerous, perilous, 153, 19. 
ply5te(n), plyghte(n), whv., OE. 
jplihtan; promise, pledge, plight; 
i”f‘ P^yg^te, 95, 2 ; /r. I sg plyste, 
124, 19 ; pp. plight, 240, 0. 
peer, see pouer. 
ppke, sh,, OE. poca ; bag, St, 30. 
polcat, sb,, OF. poule, Mien’ + OE. 

ca2tt ; polecat, 244, 27. 
pollusySne, sb,, NF. pollucion ; poUu- 
lion, 147,9. 

pomp, sh,, OF. pompe ; pomp, 1 57, 26. 
P9pe, sb,, OE. papa ; pope, father, 77, 
3I- 

pople, see peple. 
porchaSj J^ee puxchas. 
pore, see povre, 

porter, sb,, OF, pettier ; porter, 35, 

13. 

E e 


porveie(n), wkv.,^ OF. purveir; pro- 
vide, puj'vey ; inf i^orvcie, 51, 19; 
pp, porveid, 20S, 10; //. purveyde, 
^233, 4 * 

post, sb., OE. post ; poU; pi. ppstes, 
21. 

postel, sb., OE. postol ; apostle ; pL 
posstless (O), 12, 4. 

Posthumus, sb., Lat. Posthumus; 

Posthumus ; Silvias, 220, 2. 
pot, sb., OF. pot; pot ; pi. pottes, 96, 
24. 

pothecarie, sb., OF. apotccaire ; 

apothecary, 244, 24. 
potten, see pu.tte(n'). 
poudre, sb., OF, poiidre; powder, 
100, 22. 

pouer, power, poer, sb., NF.poner< 
poueir ; OF. pouoir; ability; 
iipen here power, according to their 
ability, 116, 21; pdiier, 215 16; 
peer, 2^, 14. 

Poule, pound, see Powel, piind. 
p6ure(n), wJ^., origin uncertain j 
pour; pt, sg, pouied, 245, ii- 
pouste, sin, OF. poeste, poustej 
power, ability, 148, 16, 
pover, see povre. 

povert, sb., OF. povertc, beside 
poverte ; poverty, 94, 16. 
povre, pore, adj., OF. povre ; poor, 
18, 7 ; pore, 48, 20 ; pover, 1 35, 12. 
Powel, Poule, sb,, OE.Pawel; Paul, 

1 17, I ; ds. Poule, 109, 22. Kt. 
Paul, 216, 27. 
power, see pouer. 
poynt, sb., OF. point ; pohet, 59, 3. 
poyson, sb., OY* poison ; poison, 244, 

17- 

praid, praies, see preie(n,). 
prais0(ii), see preise(n). 
praiigle(n), wkv., OE. *prangan, cf. 
Goth, piaggan; fetter; pp. prangled, 
84, 19. 

pray, prayde, see preie(n). 
praye, pray, sb.^ OF. preiej prey, 
219, 24. Nth. pray, t$B, 22. 
prayen, see preiefn). 
prayer©, see prey^re. 
prayinge, prayng, sb., based on OF. 
preier; praying; prayng, 222, 18. 


2 



420 


GLOSSARY 


pr|e]ie(n)jZ£;^.5 OF.pr^cher; preachy 
inf. prfchen, aoo, 20; prfche, 51,1; 
imp, pi, prgche5e, 200, 18. Wth. 
pr. ppl. prgchand, 140, 30 ; pt. sg. 
prgchid, 136, 13 . 

prf chur, sb.y OF. pr8chur ; preache7'^ 
213, 20. 

prfchynge, prfohing, pr.ppL as sb. ; 
preaching, 120, i ; prgching, 137, 
30. 

precious, precius, adj., OF. precius; 

precious, 242, 12; precius, 139, 26. 
prede, see pryde. 

preie(n), preye(n), praye(n), wkv,^ 
OF. preier; pray', inf preien, 58, 
30; prey?, pr. i sg. prey 

106, 22; pray, 123, 31 5 
prayen, 236, 26 ; pt. sg. preyd, 98, 
10; praid, 139, ii ; preyde, 344, 25 ; 
pt.pl. prayde, 223, 20. Krth. pr. 3 
sg. praies, X29, 26. 

preise(ii), praise(ii), wkv,, OF. 
preiser ; praise^ value ; inf. preisen, 
198, 4 ; pt.pl. preysed, 89, 7 ; pp. 
praised, 134, 4. 

prejudys, sc,, OF. prejudice; pre^ 
jtidice, 11*2, 18. 

prelat, sb., OF. prelat; prelate*, pi. 
prelates, 127, 4. 

precst, preove, see prest, preve(ii). 
presand, see present, 
prfse, j'^.aNF. pres, OF. preis; praise, 
160, 10, 

present, sb., OF. present; present; 
pi. present, 28, 17. IQ'tli. presand, 
131, 14. 

presse(n), wkv., OF. presser; press, 
pursue ; Ntli. pi. pi. presit, 1 75, 1 1, 
prest, preste, sb., OE. preost ; priest, 
1 1 9, 16; pi. pieostes (eME.), 4, i ; 
ds. preoste (eME.), 197, 22. 
prest, adj,, OF. prest ; ready, prompt, 
61, 10. 

presunie(n), whv., OF. presumer; 

presume ; pr.pl, presumen, 236, 2. 
prevely, see prively. 
preve(n), wkv,, OF. pniever, prever, 
prover ; cf. pr6ve(n) ; prove ; inf 
preve, 88, 3. eME. pr. sbj, sg. 
preove, 199, 18. 
preyd, preye(n), see preie(n). 


preySre, prayere, sb., OF. preiere; 

prayer, <^2>, ii; piayere, 139, 19. 
preysen, price, see preise(n), pris. 
pride, see pryde. 

prike(n), wkv., OE. prician (priccan) ; 
prick, spur, as a horse; pt. pi. 
priked, 16 r, i. 

prikke, sh., OE. prica ; prick, point, 
dot, 215, 12. 

prime, sb,, OF. prime ; prime, six in 
the morning, 119, 6; prime day, 
first hour of the day, 119, 2. 
prince, sb., OF. prince ; prince ; pi. 
princes, loi, 20. 

principal, pryneipal, adj., OF . prin- 
cipal; principal; pi. principale, 
9 ; pryneipal, 235, 28. 
prior, sb., NF. prior, OF. ^ivox; prior, 


I, II. 

pris, price, prise, sb., OF. pris; 
prize, price, high esteem, value, 27, 
23; prise, 135, 14; price, 169, 4; 

pryce, 105, 21 ; blowe Jje pris, 
arouse the prize (as in hunting), 
62, 8. 

prisse(n), wkv., OF. prisier; appraise, 
value, praise, extol; Nth. inj. priss, 
169, 13. _ 

prisun, prisoun, prison, sb,, OF. 
prison, AN. prisun ; prison, 2,^ 2j) ; 
pi. ^prisoners, 21,8; prison, 

42, 4; prisoun, 232, 5. ^ 
prisuner, sb., OF- *prisonier, or based 
on prisun ; keeper of prison, 21, 6. 
prive, privee, cidj,, OF. privy, 
secret, 102, 7; pryve, 99, 19 ; piivee, 

13 - , . 

prively, priviliche, adv., OF. prive 
+ ME. \y; privily, 243, i ; piyvyly, 
98, 31 ; prevely, 113, 20. Sth, 
priviliche, 204, 12. 

privilege, sb., OF. privilege ; privilege, 
special ^ant ; pi, privilegies for -es, 

4. 18. 

processihn, sh,, AN. processiun, OF. 

procession ; processio7i, 8, 8. 
proolamacion (-oun), sb,, OF. pro- 
damacion ; proclamation, 233, 18 j 
//, proclamaciouns, 235, 10, 
prooure(n), wkv., OF. procurer; 
procure; pp. procuiede, 147, 9. 



GLOSSARY 


421 


ppofessyon, OF. profession j pf'o- 

fessim^ iio, 8. 

profitable, profsrtable, adj,, OF. 
profitable; profitable, 234, 22 ; pro- 
fy table, 225, 33. 

profre(n), OF, proferer ; proffer, 

offer \ inf. profre, 235, 2; pt. pL 
proferd, 162, 19. 

profit, sb,, OF, profit ; profit, 223, 27. 
profitable, see profitable, 
proienie, sb,, OF. progenie; progeny, 
69, 10. 

prgloug, si., OF. prologue ; prologue, 
minotmcevient, 134, 23. 
propbeoi, sb., OF. prophecle; pro- 
fhecy, 131, 5. 

prophete, sb,, OF. prophete ; prophet, 

n> 30 * 

prop9se(n), ivhu,, OF, j^roposer; 
propose, 7 iominate\ proposed, 

233> I- 

propre, propir, adj,, OF. propre; 

p^per, 222, 4; propir, 136, 10, 
proud, prud. 

prout, adj,, OE. prut ; protid, 20S, 4. 
Cf. prud. 

pr6ve(u), tjoh},, OF. pruever ; ; 

inf, prove, 106, 4. ITth. pr. 2 sg, 
proves, 137, 12; pr\ shj, pi. pruf 
(INth.), 167, I. Cf. preve(u). 
prdwe, sb., OK. pi on ; p7‘ofit, 107, 21. 
prowesse, sb., OK. pniesse ; prowess, 
206, 28. 

prud, proud, ail/., lOE. prud, cf. 
ON. prutJr ; proud^i, 16 ; proud, 
48, 16; super 1. proudeste, 240, 20. 
pruf, see pr6ve(u). 
priite, sb., Stb. = Ml. pride ; OE. 

pryte; pnde, 209, 13. 
pruyde, pryce, see pryde, pris, 
pryde, sb,, OE. pr5?te; pnde, 108, 
n. WMl. pruyde, 120, 12. Kt. 
prede, 211, 20. 
pryncipal, see principal, 
pry ve, see prive. 
pryvyli, see prively, 
pryvyte, sb., OF. privete; secrecy, 
secret, 94, ii. 

pfind, pound, sb., OE. pund, ^ad ; 
pound', pi* pund, 47, 10; pound, 
94, 20; eME. ds. piinde, 178, ir. 


punde(n), wkv., Sth. = Ml. plnde(n) ; 
OE. pyndan (pyndan); impound-, 
da^n up, as water-, pr. 3 sg, piint, 
200, 33; pr.pl. pundeS, 201, 12. 
punisclie(n), iv/cv., OF. punir, 
ptiniss-; ptmish-, Sth. pp. ypun- 
issed, 2 1 8, 12. 
puple, see peple. 
pur, /rtf/., OF. pur;/?;', 89, 31. 
pur, adj., OF. pur; pttre, simple, 
209, 2. 

purebas, porohas, sb., OF. pourchas; 
earnings, eftdeamr-, porchas, 204, 
22. 

purgatorie, sb., OF. purgatorie; p2tr- 
gatory, 217, ii. 

purifiefn), OF. purifier; pt0'ify\ 

inf purifie, 102, 9. 
purpre, sb., OF. purpre; purple, 192, 
26. 

pursue(n), wkv., OF. por-poursuir ; 
pursue, follow after, take ; //. pi. 
pursued, 222, 28. 
purveyen, see porveie(n), 
put, sb., Stb. = Mk pit; OE. pytt; 

pit% ds. piitte, 182, 7. 
putfal, sb., OE.*pyttfeall,/.; pitfall, 
trap, 223, 24. 

Putifar, j^.,Lat. Putiphar; Potiphar, 
21, i; 24, 17. 

putte(n), wkv., OE. potian, perh. 
OK. bouter, ‘thrust* ; push, thrust, 
put\ z«/. putten, 120, 13; itnp.sg. 
putt, 102, i4;/r.///.puttyng, 233, 
27 ; pt. sg. putte, 244, 17; put, 136, 
29 ; pt. 2 sg. pottest, 55, 9. Kth. 
pr. 3 sg. puttes, 143, 25. Stb. //. 
jput, 222, 20; yputt, 233, n. 
pyked,//. adj., piked, pointed, 120, 
23 - 

pyler, pyne(n), see pil€r, pine(n). 
pylgryma^e, sb., OF. pelerinage,infl. 
by pilegrhn < OF. pelegrin ; pil- 
gidmage, 98, 7, Cf. peXeriuage, 
pyte, see pite. 


Qi. 

q,ua, sec wlx6. 

<a.u^o, QLuad, see <iuak0(n), <3LU^e(n). 



422 


GLOSSARY 


qu5ke(ii), Sth. quakie(n), wkv.^ OE. 
cwacian; quake, tremble \ pt, sg. 
quakede, 44, 10. ^ OSTtli. inf. quae, 
152, 8. eSth. hif. quakien, 182, 

qualle, sb., irth. -= ML whal ; OE. 

hwsel; whale, 151, 27. 
quam, see who. 

quan (qwan, quane, quanne), see 
whanne. 

quautitee, OF.quantite; quantity, 

quarel, sb., Ot. quarrel; quarrel, 
square bolt, 215, 18. 
quarell, sb., OF. querele ; quarrel, 
106, 6. 

quarfor, see wlierfgre. 
quarterne, sb., OE. eweartem, neut.\ 
prison ; pi. quarterne, 3, 9. 
quarporu, see wherporu. 
quasi., see whos^. 
quat, see who, qu^e(n). 
quatki2i,/?72.,0E. hwset + cynn ; what 
kind of, 133, 20. 

quats9, indef prn., OE. hwsetswa ; 
what so, 30, 14. 

quatsgevere, indef. pm., OE. hwset- 
swa +^fre; whatsoever, 30, 12. 
qufd, ewfad, quoad, sb., OE. cw^d ; 
evil, 50, 20 ; pe qufde, evil 07 ie, 89, 
25. Sth. ds. ewgade, 200, 27 ; 
kwead, 217, 8. Kt. ds. kweade, 
216, 31. 

quedux, quehepir, see wheper. 
queintis, sb., NF. queintise, OF. 
cointise ; skill, wisdom, 104, 8. Cf. 
quointise. 

quelle(n), wlev., OE. cwellan^' kill, 
archaic quell', inf. quelle, 44, 20. 
Nth. inf. qwell, 159, 30. 
queme^ adj., OE. eweme; pleasant, 
agreeable, 76, 28. 

queme, sb., OE. eweme; pleasure, 
to (lulme, for pleasure, 49, 25. 
quen, quhen, see whanne. 
quenching, sb., based on OE. ewen- 
cau; quenching, 18, 18, 
queue, sb., OE. ewen ; queen ; ewen 
(eME.), 6, 6 ; ewene, 74, i ; quene, 
42, 14. 

qu§®e(ii), stv., OE. cwe?Jan-cwaff (5) ; 


speak, say\ pt. sg. qua??, 22, 3; 
quad, 22, 21 ; quat, 30, 9; quod, 
1 1 4, 7. Sth, pt. sg. ewe??, 201, 
23; quo??, 193, 30 iqueden, 
176, 9. 

que'iSersg, indef. pr 7 i.. Nth. eME. — 
Ml. whepersg ,* OE. h\vse??er + swa ; 
whether so, 21, 21. 
quha, see who. 
quharthrou, see quarporu. 
quhen, see whanne. 
quhene, adv., OE. hvvanone, hwanan; 

•whence, 173, 28. 
quMll, qui, see whil, whi. 
quicliche, adv., Sth. = Ml. quikly, 
OE. *cwicllce,cf.cwicullce; qttickly, 
207, 24. 

quide, sb., OE. ewide ; what is said, 
word, 1 91, 14. 

quik, ewik, cidj., OE. ewie; alive, 
141, 6. 

quik, quio, adv., OE. cwice; quickly, 
quyk, 88, 19. 

quil, quilc, see whil, while. 
quil(e), see while. 

quiles,i3:^/iy.,eM£l.,Nth. = Ml. whiles j 
OE. hwilum, mod. by gen. advs.; 
whiles, at times, 34, 10. 
quilke, see while, 
quilum, see whilem. 
quiste, sb., OE. ewis, /. + t; will. 


iestafneni, 75, 27. 

quite (quite ^), adj., OF. quite ; quit, 
free, 44, 22. , 

quite (n), OF. quiter; requite, 
pay ; inf. quite, 54, 30. 
quo, quod, see who, qufiSe(n), 
quointise, sb., OF. cointise; skill, 
plan, wisdom, orna 7 ne 7 it, 208, i . 
qu^r, adv., eMES., Nth. = Ml, wher, 
whgr; OM.hwer, hwar, WvS. hwser, 
where, 33, 12. 
quoso, see whos^. 

quoynte, adj., OF. coint; happy, gay, 
57,6- 


quyk, see quik. 


qwan, see whanne. 


qwat, see who. 


qwell, see quelle(n). 


qwo, qw6s9, see who, whosg. 
qwyche, see which. 



GLOSSARY 


423 


B. 

rao, sb,, cf. Norw. Swed. rak ; blow^ 

beating^ 52, 20. 

racheiitege, sb,, OM. lacentege, 
WS. racenteage ; chain ^ fetter \ fl. 
rachenteges (eME.), 3, 14. 
rad, radde, see rede(n). 
rade, eME.,35Ttli, « Ml. r§de*, OE. 

rad,/ ; road, 196, 29. 
radx, see rf di. 

r®d, rSdesmatL, see red, rfdesmaB.. 
rSflao, sb,, OE. reaflac ; robbery, 
rapine, 2, 11. 
r®vede(n), see r|ve(ii). 
r»v|re, sb^, OE. reafere; robber, 
4» 4* 

rafte, see rfv(eii). 

rage, sb., OF. rage; rage, folly, 
240, 9, 

rage(ii), wlw., OF. ragier ; rage, be 
wanton \ lS%la.pr, 3 sg. rages, 127, 

so- 

ragged, adj\, cf. ON. rogg,. ^ tuft, 
rag ’ ; ragged, shaggy, 60, 9. 
rais (raiss), see rise(n). 
raised, raises, see reise(ni). 
rafce(n), whv., ON. raka; rahe or 
szveep away, destroy, inf raken, 
24, 4. 

Bamesesie, sh., OE. Ramesig (-eg) ; 

Ramsey (Huntingdonshire), 8, 9. 
Bamese, sb., Lat. Kameses ; Rameses, 

32, 32. 

ran, see reiiXLe(n). 

rano, rank, adj., OE. ranc ; strong, 
proud, rank, 23, 9. 

'&e.rs^2l^,sb,, Randall\ Schir Thomas, 
169, 1. 

Bandolf, sb., Randolf Earl of Ches- 
ter, 5, 18. 

ransake(n),^ whv., ON. rannsaka,. 
cognate with OE. sem, * house', and 
sacan, * strive'; ransack, search’, 
inf. ransaken, 30, 3. 
ransdline(n), wko., OF. ransonner, 
r^sunner ; ransom ; pr. 3 sg. ran- 
sounneJ>, 104, i8. 

rap, sh., ON. ’*'rap, Dan. rap; blow, 
beating, 32, 20. 


rap, sb., eME., BTth. = Ml. rgp ; OE. 

rap ; rope ; pi. rapes, 6, 29. 
rape(n), wkv., ON. hrapa; hasten*, 
imp.pl. rape's, 30, 29. 
rapli, adv., ON. *hrap, cf. Dan. rap, 
‘ swift ' + ME. ll; quickly, 155, 26. 
ras, see rise(n). 

ratch, sh., OE. rsecc; hunting dog; 
pi. ratches, 62, 7. 

rais, adj., OE. hrseS; quick; comp. 
ra])er, 220, 15. 

ralSe, rape, adv., OE. hratJe; quickly, 
29, 25 ; ra‘5e (eME.), 180, ii. 
ratte, sb., OE. rsett,/; rat; pi. rattes, 
244, 26. 

Banland, OF. Roland?; Roland, 
126, 15. 

rannsiin, sh., OF. raenson, ranson, 
AN. ransun ; redemption, ransom, 
94» 25* 

raw, sb., Nth. -Ml Sth. rowe; OE. 
raw,/; row, line, order, 133, ii, 
Cf. rowe. 

rfaden, rfadelS, see r§de(n). 
rfaven, rfavien, see rfve(n). 
reoche(n), reche(n), wkv., OE. 
reccan, reccean; tell, expound; inf 
I rechen, 22, 22 ; pr. Xsg. recche, 94, 
23 ; sg. rechede, 23, 28. C£ 
reke(n). 

receyve(n),7«/<fe'., OF.rece(i)ver; re- 
ceive; fr. pi. receyveth, 122, 11; 

I pr. sbj. pi. receyve, 122, 5; pp. 

I receyved, 1 1 1, 6 ; reseyvet, 1 18, 28. 

Nth. inf resayve, 139, 28 ; pr. 3 sg. 
rescheyves (INth.), 146, 6. 
reohe(n), w^., Sth. = Ml reke(n) ; 
OE. recan (reccan)~r6hte (rohte) ; 
care, reck; pr. i sg. recche, 94, 23; 
reiche, 231, 18; 3 sg. reejj, 180, 13. 
rfohe(n), wkv., OE. r^cean-rsehte ; 

reach; inf rfehe, 43, 21. 
reohingj sb., based on rechen ; inter- 
pretation, 21, 22. 

reoomande(n), wkv., OF. recom- 
mander ; call, summon ; inf reco- 
mandyn, li8, 31, 

record, sb., OF. record ; record; ds. 
recorde, 234, i5. 

recorde(n), w/^., OF. recorder; re- 
cord; pi. sg. recorded, 105, 3. 



424 


GLOSSARY 


reoT|atiiit,j^., OF. recreant ; recreant, 
defeated, 113, 5. 

reciiSe, red, see reclie(n), rede(n). 
rfd, redd, OE. read ; red ; ds. 

r|de, 47, 10 ; redde, 112, ii. 
red, (rfd), rede, sd., ON. red, WS. 
r^d, f ; counsel, advice ; r^d, 6, 
18 ; rM, 46, 21 ; ds. rede, 70, 16. 
Sth, rfde, 176, 4. 
redde, see rfdi. 

rede(2i), stv.^ OM. redan (WS. rie- 
dan)-red (R) ; counsel, explain, 
read', mf, redenn (O), 9, 10; pr» i 
sg, rede, 24, 5 ; rfde, 15, 9 ; pr. sbj, 
sg. rede, 52, 21 ; pi. sg. red, 155, 27. 
Nth. i^f. red, 126, 2; pr. ppL 
redande, 144, 3. Sth. inf. rfde, 
206, 23; pr. I sg. reade (eSth.), 
193? 13; rfadeS, 200, 19; 

pt. sg. radde, 45, 25 ; pp. rad, 35, 
3; irad, 40,4; ired (WML), 123, 
5. Kt.pr. pi. redeth, 210, 21. 
rfdesman, sb., Sth. == ME. redes- 
man; WS. rfdesman; counsellor; 
pi. rsedesmen, 226, 5 ; rfdesmen, 
2 2d, 24. 

rfdi, radi, redde, adj., OE. *rffidig, 
extended from OE. rsede, ‘ ready ’ ; 
ready, 17, 18; radI, loi, 7; redde, 
T33» II- 

rfdily, rfdiliohe, adv., OE. *nedi- 
llce; readily, quickly, 239, 5, Sth. 
(SEMI), rfdiliche^ 69, 30. 
Rfdinge,j3.,OE. Readinge; //.name 
of people, then of place ; Reading, 
Berks., 2, 2. 

rfdnes, sb., OE. readness, ^ ; redness, 
148, II. 

redunge, sb., OM. reding, WS. r^d- 
ing,y;; reading, 192, 3. 

Red vers, sb., OF. Redviers, Reviers ; 

Redvers, Baldwin de, 2, 12. 
r§fs, sb., OE. r»s; rush, forward 
movement, iii, 24. 
refe(ii), %uh}.,QWl^. s=Ml. reven; OE. 

hrefan ; roof-, inf. refen, 4, 14. 
refdse(n), wkv., OF. refuser ; refztse ; 

pr. sbj.sg, refuse, 118, 10. 
refdt, sb., OF. refute ; rfuge, 1-03, 24. 
reijhellboc, sb., OE.regolb6c; book 
of canons or rules, 8, 16. 


regnynge, sb., based on regne(n); 

reigning, ruling, 236,- 28. 
reiche, see reche(ii). 
rein, sb., OE. regn; rain, 1S6, 6. 
reise(n), wkv., ON. reisa, cogn. with 
OK r^ran ; raise ; pr. 3 sg. reisetJ, 
14, II ; pt. sg. raised, 132, 16 ; pp. 
reysed, 117,6. Nth./r. 3 sg. raises, 
129, 23. 

reke(n), wkv., OE. lecan, reccan- 
rohte (rohte) ; care, reck; Nth.//. 
sbj. sg. roucht, 167, 3. 
reke(n), reche(n), wkv., OM. rec^- 
cean-rsehte (WS. reahte); stretch, 
extend, direct onis way ; go tell, 
recite; pt. pi. rekened, 89, 5. Cf. 
reeche(n). 

reli^ias, adj. and sb., OF. religius 
(ous); religiotcs, 199, 5. 
rely(en), wkv., OF. relier, ralier; 

rcilly; Nth.//, sg. relyit, 167, 30. 
rely^on, sb., OF. religion ; religion, 
II 2, 4. 

rfm, sb., OF. realme, reaume, reame ; 

realm, 225, 16. Cf. revnne. 
rfm, sb., OE, hream; cry, uproar, 14, 
II. 

remedye, remedy, sb., OF. remede, 
perh. *remedie; 7 'emedy, 235, 28; 
remedy, 145, 13. 

remembre(n), wkv., OF. remembrer; 
remember; pr. ppl. remembraunt 
(for -and), 105, 9, 

remenaunt, sb., OF. remanant ; rem- 
nant, remainder, iiS, 7, 
rende(n), wkv., OE. rendan, rendan ; 

rend, tear ; //. sg. rende, 195, 21. 
renne(ii), riniie(n.), stv., ON. renna 
(rinna)-rann (3) ; mm ; inf. renne, 
50, 30; pt. sg. lan, 78, 3. Nth. 
imp. sg. ryn, 141, 30 ; pt. pi. ryn, 
I4i» 5- 

rente, sh,, OF. rente ; revenue, rent; 

pi. rentes, 4, 14. 
reope(n), see ripe(n), 
repair©(n), repare(n), wlrv., OF. 
repairer ; repair, return ; pr. 3 sg. 
repaireth, 245, 17. INth. pp. re- 
parit, 168, 28. 

r©pente(n),' wkv., OF. repentir; re- 
pent; inf. repenle, 244, 22. 



GLOSSARY 425 


repleet, adj,, OF. replet ; replete^ 
quite full ^ 238, 7. 

reporte(n), isuku., OF. reporter ; re- 
port*^ pr, sbj. report, 239, 7. 
represente(n), wkv. , OF. representer; 

represent'^ pt. sg, represented, 234, 3. 
repr6ve(n), %akv.y OF. reprover ; re~ 
prove*, pt, shj, sg. repioved, 234, i; 
pp, reproffede, 145, 21. 
rf<3.uiein, OF. requiem ; requum, 
117, 21. 

r|re(ii), wJtv,^ OE. rXran ; rear, 
raise, build', zVz/". rfien, 73, 2. Sth. 
inf. r|re, 210, 2. 

resayve, rescheyve, reseyvet, see 
Teceyve(n). 

rfs6ii, rfsvin, rfsoun, sb., OF. reson, 
AN. lesim; reason, discou7‘se, 105, 
iSjjrfsun, 133, 9; rfsoun, 91, 6; 
rfsoune, 141, 8. 

rfsonabie, adj., OF, raisonable ; 

reasonable, 136, 26. 
reste, OE. rest,/.; rest, 32, 28. 

Ntli. ryst, 146, 23 ; rystf, 144, 5. 
reste(n), ryste(ii), wkv., OE. restan ; 
rest) jJS'th. mf. ryste, 144, 31 ; pr. 
3 sg. rystes, 144, 28. 
restel§§s, adj., OE. resteleas infl. by 
ME. reste; restless, 240, 32. 
rest§re(ii), wkv., OF, restorer; re- 
store) inf. restgre, 95, 24. 
rfsun, see rfson. 

Beuda, sb., Reuda, 222, 3. 
reuel, reul, sb., OF. reule ; rule, 155, 
24; reul, 155, 26. 

reui^l, ad/., OE. *hreowful ; rueful, 
sorrowful, 92, I9. 

reuliohe, OE.hreowlIce; sadly, 
pitifully, 60, 8. 
reuly, see reweli. 

renpe, re-w^Je, reuth, sb., OE. 
’•‘hreowty, f. ; sorrow, repentance, 
ruth, 37, 19; rewtJe, 30, 19, Ntb. 
reuth, 129, 17. 

rfv"e(B.), wjrv., OE, reafian ; rob, 
plu7ider\ inf. rfven, 79, 19; pr. 3 
s^» 198, 22 ; pt. sg. r^vede 

(eME*), 2? I ; rfvede, 7, 4 ; rafte, 
55 > 4 ; PL pi* rXveden (eME.), 3, 
25; pp. rafte, I13, 24. Nth. inf. 
r|ve, 144, 12, Sth, inf rfaven 


(eSth.), 197, 2 ; Hnp. sg. r|avTe, 
200, 26. 

reward, sb., OF. reward; reward, 
regard', to pe leward of, to the 
regard of, in respect to, 21S, 7. 
rewe, ^< 5 ., OE. r^w (raw),y*. ; 7'ow', 
by rewe, in a 7'ow, 228, 15. 
reweli, reuly, adj., OE. hieowllc ; 
sad, compassio 7 iate, 30, 8; reuly, 
59, II. 

rew0(n), stv., OE. hreowan-hrgaw 
(R) ; rue, 7'epe7it ; inf rewen, 20, 
24; niwen, 176, 21. 
rewnae, sb., OF. realme, reaume; 

reahn, 236, 5. Cf. rfm. 
rewnesse, sb., OE, hreowness, f. ; 
pity, 80, 9. 

rewtfe, rewthe, see reuj>e. 
reyke(n), wkv., ON. leika; wa7ider\ 
inf. reykin, 55, 21. 
reysed, see reise(n). 
rice, riche, adj., OE. rice, later infl. 
by OF. riche ; poweiful, 7‘ich, 1,6; 
supe 7 'l. liccheste, 182, 30; ricchest, 
186, 23. 

Bichard, sb., OE. Richard ; Richa7'd, 
206, 31. 

riche, sb., OE. rice ; reahn ) Sth. ds. 
richen, 183, 13. 

richelike, ^v., OE. richllce, mod. by 
OF. riche ; richly, 33, 26. 
richesse, sb., OF. richesse; wealth, 
siches, 215, 17. * 
rioht, see riht. 

ride(n), stv., OE. rldan-rad (i) ; 
ride) pr, ppL ridend, 4, 3 ; pt. sg. 
rgd, 52, 28; rggd, 229, 6; rgde, 
106, 25; pt. pi. ridyn, 112, 25. 
Bt'h.pr.ppl. ridinde, 1S9, 16. 
rifle (n), wkv., OF. riner; rife, 
plunder, spoil) pp. rifild, 161, 2, 
rift, sb., OE. rift; veil) ds. rifte, 
188, 26. 

rightly, adv., OE. rihtlice; rightly) 
I 27 j 24. 

rightwis,^*., OE. rihtwis ; righteous, 
I 39 » 3 - 

rigolai:e, sb., OF. rigolage; sport, 
struggliftg, boisterous conduct, 127, 

31* 

rigt, rigtc, see riht. 



GLOSSARY 


rxgte(iL) , OE. rihtaji ; straighten^ 
correct \ inf, rigten, i6, 27; pr. 3 
sg, rigtetS, 15, 18. 

ri^tful, ry^tful, adj,, OE. *rihtfnl; 
righteous \ rj^stful, 100, 21 ; ryght- 
ful, 232, 19. 

rijtfulnes, sb,^ OE. *rihtfulnes, f , ; 

righteousness, loi, 4. 
rilit, rigt, riclit, adj,^ OE. riht ; 
rights rihht(O), 10, 4 ; rigt, 15, 23; 
ridit, 76, 30; right, 127, ii; ds. 
rigte, 20, 22 ; be gode rihte, ds,^ by 
good right, 7, 3 ; pi. ryght, 233, 5. 
rilLtwIsness©, sb., OE. nhtwTsnes,^: ; 

righteousness, 178, 16. 
riif, see ryfe. 

rike, adj,, K^th. = Ml. Sth. rTche ; OE. 

rice ; powerful, mighty, rich, 126, 9. 
rim©, rim, sb., OE. lim, neut. ; rime, 
number, song, 9, 8. mii. rim, 
129, 5. 

rime(ii), wkv., OE, riman ; number, 
rime\ Wth, pr. ppl. rimand, 133, 
13- 

rine(u), who., OE. rignan, rinan; 

rain', inf line, 186, 6. 
ring, sb., OE. bring ; ring, 24, t i ; 

lynge, 109, 27 ; ds, ringe, 46, 20. 
ri2ige(n), ryng©(n), siv., OE. ringan 
-rang (rgng) (3); ring', w//: rynge, 
123, II ; pt, sg. rgng, 238, 32. 
Hth, pr, pi. ringes, 76, 25. 
rinne(n), see reiine(n), 
riote, riot, sb., OF. riote; riot, 127, 
3o_^riot, 237, 9. 

riotour, sb., OF. rioteur, riotour; 

brawler, rioter, 238, 31. 
ripe, adj., OE. ripe; ripe, 21, 26. 
ripe(n), stv., OE. rlpan-rap (i); 
reap', inf, ripen, 176, 22. ©Sth. 
imp. pi. reope (< OAng. reopan- 
rap), 196, 19. 

rise(n), siv., OE. nsan-ms (i); rise', 
imp. sg. ris, 82, 28; pt. sg. ras 
(eME.), II, 9; rps, 15, 3; pt. pi. 
risen, 2, ii ; pp, risenn (0), 12, 6. 
lITth.//. sg, raiss=ras, 172, 16. 
xivelie, adv., ON. rifr, ‘ abundant ’ + 
ME. ’lie; abundantly, frequently, 
commonly, 154, 7. 

riveling, sb., OE. rifeling ; a sort of 


shoe ; mghfut rivaling (a nickname 
of the Scotch), 161, 

rixe(ii), wkv., OE. ricsian, rlxian; 

rtile, reign', inf rixan, 7, 8. 
rixlie(n), w^., Sth. = Ml. rixle(n); 
OE. rixlian; rule; eSth. pr. 3 sg. 
iixleo'5, 1S2, 30. 

ro, sb., ON. ro, cogn. with OE. ruvv, 
f . ; rest, quiet, 51, 19. 
robbe(n), wkv., OF. lober; rob, 
plunder; //.//. robbed, 165, 23, 
Sth. inf. robby, 205, 25. 
robberie, sb., OF. roberie; robbe7y, 
209, 17. 

robby, see robbe(n). 
rgbe, sb., OF. robe, robe, clothing; 
pi. rjbes, 49, 4. 

Bodbert, sh,, OF. Rodberd ; Robert, 
Earl of Gloucester, 5, ii* 
rgde, sb., OE.rad,/; riding, journey , 
road, 61, 27. 

rode, sh., OE. rod, f.; cross, rood, 


4 , 31 - 

rgde, see ride(n). 

r6detr§, sb., OE. rod, /I + treo ; c7'oss, 
rood-tree, ii, 26. 

Eodric, sb., OF. Rodric; Roderic, 
220, 19. 

Bo^er, sb., OF. Roger; Roger, 227, 


3 - 

Bogingham, sb. , Rockingha7?i (N orth- 
ampton), 4, 22. 

rohly, adv., OE, *ruJilice; roughly, 
savagely, 149, 23, 

rolle(n), wkv,, OF. roller; roll; pr, 
3 sg. rolleth, 244, lo. 

Bomare, sb., NF. Romare, OF. 
Roumare ; Romare, William of, 
5 , 23. 

rgmaunse, rpmans, sb., OF. ro- 
mance; romance, 115, 21 ; rgmans, 
126, 2. 

Bomayn, adj., OF. roumain, NF, 
remain; Romafz, 221, 27. 

Borne, sb., OE, Rom, f., L. Roma ; 

Romer4>^7' 

Bo3aienel,.f3.,OF.Romenel; Roirm0, 
186, 9, 

ron, see run, rbne. 
rond, adj., OF. rond, AN. rund; 
round; wk. ronde, 126, 14. 



GLOSS ABY 


427 


rgng, see ringe(n). 
rggd, rgs, see ride(ii), rise(xL). 
rospe(n.), wkv.^ ON. *raspen, Dan. 
raspe or OF. raspe ; rasp^ scrape^ 
destroy ; m/. rospen, 24, 4. 
r§ste(ii), 7Cf/^v., OF. rostir; roast \ 
Nth. 'mf, ipst, 171, 3 ; pt.pl rgstit, 


17I5 15- 

rote, sb,^ ON. rot,/.; root, 127, iS. 
r9te(n), OE. rotian ; rot^ become 
putrid', pp. rpted, 58, 20. 
rpten, rotin, adj.^ ON. rotinn ; rotten, 
putrid, 50, 12. 

r§]>, sb,, ON. rats, cogn. with OM. 
red, WS. reed ; counsel, advise, 
plan ; ds. r9J)e, 86, 9. 
r§'8e(n), wkv., ON. ratJa, cogn. with 
OE. raedan; advise, cotmsel\ hif, 

75 » 23. , ^ . 

rdu, adj., OE. ruh; rough, hatry, 
60, 9. 

roucht, see reke(ii). 
roun, see run, (rune). 
rduiiie(n), iokv„ OF. ronger; gnaw, 
gnash with the teeth, perh. Scot. 
much \ Nth. inf, roiinge, 156, 23. 
route, rout, sb,, OF, route ; company, 
army, m/^205, 28. Nth. rout, 
158, 32; rowt, 158, 16. 
route(ii), whv,, ON. rauta; roar, 
Sftore ; pt, sg. routit, 172, 10. 
Hoveoestre, sb., OE. Hrofesceaster ; 
Rochester, 6, 10. 

.rowe, sb,, OE. rw, raw,/; row, 
straight line, 62, 9. 
rowe(n), stv., OE. rowan-reow (R) ; 
row, go by water, sail ; inf, rowen, 


^ 97 » 3 . _ 
rowt, see route. 

rii^, Sth. = Ml. rii: (rig^e), sb,, 
OE. hrycg j back, ridge ; ds, rligge, 


207, 9. 

rugge(n), wkv,, ON. rugga; rock, 
agitate, pull \ pt,pl, mgget, 142, 5. 

•rughfate, sb, as cuif, OE. ruh + fot ; 
rough foot, 1 6 1, 5. 

rume(n), wkv,, OE. xuman; make 
room, enlarge', pt, sg, rumde, i86, 
16, 

rune, riin, ron, sb., OE. run, /. ; 
secret, colhpty, counsel, 178, 33; 


language, letter, poem ; reden roun, 
direct the conversation, 52, 21. 
Nth. ron, 133, 9. 

ruiie(ii), wkv., OE. runian ; whisper, 
archaic 7'ound; pt. sg, junde, 44, 14. 
ruwen, see rewe(n). 
rybawdye, sb., OF. ribaudie; n- 
haldry, 121, 9. 

ryche, ryeht, see riche, riht. 
rye, sh,, OE. lyge; rye, 158, 4. 
ryfe = ryf, adj., OE. rif ; edmndant, 
frequent, 106, 21 ; riif, 131, 31. 
ryght, see riht. 
ryghtful, see rigtful 
ryghtwyse, see rightwis. 
rygtfol, see rigtful. 
ryn, see renne(n). 
rynge, ryugen, see ring, ringe(n). 
ryste (ryst), see rest©, reste(n). 
rysyng, sb., based, on OE. risan; 

rising, getting up, 173, 2. ^ 
ryv0(n), stv., ON. rifa; rive, tear, 
' break ; inf. r)?ve, 243, 32. 


S. 

sa, sacolfies, see swa, sei©(n), saklf s, 
sacrafise, see sacrifice, 
sacrament, sacrement, sb., OF. 
sacrement; sacrament, 122, 4; 

sacrement, 146, 7. 

sacrifice, sacrafyse, sb., OF. sacri- 
fice ; scLcHfice, 102, 21 ; sacrafise, 
135, 13 ; sacrifise, 237, 13. 
sade, adv., OE. ssede; sufficiently, 
fully, 122, 19. 

sadel, sadil, OE. sadol; saddle, 6 j, 
15 * 

see, see s|. 

S86cle(n), wkv., OM. seclian, WS. 
sleclian ; sicken, become sick ; pt. sg. 
saeclede, 7, 33 * 
sfieden, ssegen, see s©ie(n). 
ssBgen, sb., OE. segen (ssegen), 
saying, assertion, 6, 28. 
saeht, adf, ©ME. « Ml. saht ; OE. 
soeht ; at peace, reconciled', pt. ssehte, 
2, 17. 

ssehte, see saght, eahte. 
ssehtleden, see sahtleCn). 



428 


GLOSSARY 


saBid, sself, see seie(rL), self. 

^ri, adj,, OE. sarig ; sad, sorrowful, 

i86, 21 , 

sSrinesse, sh., OE. sarigness, 
sorrow, 183, 28. 
seet, see sitte(EL), 
sa^j saeb., sabJi, see se(n). 
gaght, sahte, sb., OE. sseht,/! ; agree- 
ment, compact, 7, 15 ; ssehte, 7, 17. 
ITtE. saght, 126, 16. 
sahtle(n), wkv., OE. sahtlian; re- 
concile, 7 nake peace ; pi. pL sahtlede^ 
6, 13 ; sahtleden, 6, 15. 
sale, saine, see seie(n). 
saik, see sake. 

saint, seint, sainte, seynte, sain, 
ccdj, sb,, OF. saint,/ sainte; saint', 
seint, 58, 25 ; seynt, 88, 21 ; seynt^ 
Jghn, 106, 19; Seynte Marie, 116, 
15; Seynt Marie, iiS, 2. Ntb. 
sain, 148, i; saint, 160, 21. Stb. 
sein, 205, 13; seinte, 198, 16. Cf. 
sanct. 

sais, see seie(n). 

sake, sak, sb., OE. sacu ; sake, cause\ 
for . . . sake, on account of,i%, 16; 
sake, guilt, 230, 8. Nth. sak, 131 , 
16; saik = sak, 173, 32. 


sakerynge, pr. ppU as sb., based on 
OF. sacrer ; consecration, 123, 12. 
saklfs, adj., OE. saclfas; innocent, 
without mjury saccl^s (O), 11, 
26; saklfs, 139, 6 . eSth.sakelfas, 
199. 13- 

sal, salt, see sehule(n). 

Salamon, OE. Salomon; Solomon, 


72,4- 

sald(o), see selle(n). 

salve, sb., OE. sealf,/; salve, remedy, 

198.30- 

same, see sohame(n). 
same, samf, sadj., ON. samr ; same, 
223, 5; same, 136, 14; dat. 

sammyn, 170, 22, 

same(n), samyn, adv., ON. saman ; 
together, 79, 6 ; same, 109, 5 ; 
samyn, 137, 18. 

sainne(n),2£;/{'z/., OE. samnian; collect, 
assemble ; pp. sammnedd (O), 9, i. 
samyn, sammyn, see samen. 


sanet, sant, sb., OE. sanct; saiiit, 

1, II ; sannt (O.), 8, 17. Nth. 
sant, 1 3 1, 8. Cf. saint. 

sand, sb , OE. sand, sf nd ; sand, land, 
161,25, Cf. S9nd.. 

sande, A, OE. sand, sfnd, /. ; mis- 
sion, message, 7nessenger\ pi sandes, 

2, 1 6. Cf. sgnde. 

sane, wkv., Nth. = Ml. seine(n) ; 
OK. segnian ; sign, ma^'k with sign, 
bless, pt. sg. sanyt (INth.), 169, 12, 

sang, sb., Nth. = Ml., Sth. sfng ; OE. 

sang, sgng; song, 127, 5. 
sannt, sant, see sanct. 
sanyt, see sane. 

sar, adj., Nth, !=M1. sgr ; OE. sar ; 
sore, grievous, sad ; superl. sarest, 

I49> 32* 

Sarasyn, Sarazin, sh., OF. Sarazin ; 
Saracen, heathen, 88, 2; pi. Sarazins, 
126, 16; Sarasynes, 230, 4. 
sare, adv., Nth. for Ml. s^re ; OE. 

sare ; sorely, 77? 4 J 109, lo* 
sari, see sary. 

sarlio, adj., OE. sarlic ; sad, mourn- 
ful, 1 88, 18. 

sary, adj., Nth. » MI, sfri; OE. 

sarig, soiTy, 154, 17- 
Satan, sb., OF. Satan ; Satan, I55 j 7* 
Satanas, Satenas, sb,, L. Satanas ; 

Satan, 16, 17; Satenas, 153, 10. 
sate, sate, see sitte(n), 

Saterday, sb., OE. Sseterdseg ; Satur- 
day, 209, 20. 

sattel, wkv., Nth. = Ml. settle (n) ; 
OE. setlan; settle', inf. sattel, 151, 
24. 

sail, san5, see sawe, sefn), 

Saul, OK. Saul; Satd, 131, i. 
saule fsawle), sanl, sb., eME. Nth. 
-Ml. sowle, OE. sawel, sawl, / ; 
soul, 2, 22 ; sawle Tiede,souPs need, 
9, 4; sawle berrhless (0), sours 
salvation, lo, 24. Nth. Saul, 142, 
20 ; sawell, 156,18,*//. sauls, 137, 
22. eSth.//. saule, 180, i6j sawlen, 
197, 6. Kt. 2nule, 216, 14; pi. 
saulen, 21 1, 24. 

sanmpul, sb,, OF. esaniple ; example, 
sctniple, 127, 29. 
sauve, see save(n). 



GLOSSARY 


4^29 


s&ve, prep, and conj.^ OF. sauf ; save^ 
except, 73 . I5- 

save(n), wkv., OF. salver, sauvcr, 
saver ; save, preserve, observe ; z///. 
save, 1 1 7, i8; nnwyse to save it, 
ignorant hi observing it, 235, 17; 
pr, sbj. sg, save, 90, 12 ; hnp, sg, 
save, 21 1, 4; sauve, 21 1, 22; pp. 
saved, 74, 7. 'Nth.pr. 3 sg. saves, 
128, 21. Stli. />/». isanved, 2ir, 25. 
Savvey, sb., NF. Savei, OF. Savoi, 
Savoy ; ds. Savveye, Penes of, Peter, 
Earl of Richmond, 227, 4. 
savydure, sb,, OF. savedur; savior, 
119, 17. 

sawe, sb., OE. sagit ; saying, saza, 97, 
6; pi. sawes, 137, i. OSTth. sau, 
148, 33. 

sawe, see ae(n). 
sawell, sawle(n), see sanle. 
sawtere, sb., OF. sautier< psaltier ; 
psalter, 121, i. 

Saxon, sb., OF. Saxon ; Saxon ; pi. 
Saxons, 203, 18 ; in Saxon, against 
the Saxons, or in Saxony, that is 
England, 224, i ; West Saxon, the 
kingdom 0/ the IPesi Saxons, 222, 
26. 

Saxonlycli, adv., OF. Saxon + lice ; 

like the Saxon, 224, 9. 
say, saye(n), sayn, see seie(n). 
soffi, see h.e. 

scsel, scesrp, see seliule(n), soliarp. 
scaft, sb., eME. *= Ml. schaft ; OIL 
sceaft ; shafts ar?'ozv, spear ; pi. 
scaftes, 1 89, 30. Cf. shaft. 

■ scane(n), OE. sc^nan ; break ; 

eME./r.//. scanen, 189, 30. 
scarslyoh, adv., OF. escars + Sth.. 

lych; scarcely, 225, 18. 
scat0re(n), wl^., ODii. scateren?; 

scatter) pt. sg. scatered, 2, 21. 
soSitSe, sb., ON. ska’di ; harm, 29, 10. 
soaw, see sc]aewe(n). 
soeal, see sc]itile(ii). 
soSld, sb., eME. « Ml. scheld ; OM. 
sceld (sceld), WS. scieldj shield', 
pi. sceldes, 189, 30. 
soeone, adj., WS, sccone, sciene, OM. 

sc&ie; beautiful, bright, 190, 27. 
soeort, see eohort. 


sceove(n), OE. sceofan (scHfau)- 
sceaf (2) ; shove, move zvilh violence*, 
©Sth. inf. sceoven, 19 1, 2. 
scerp, schaft, see seharp, shaft©. 
schal(e), schalle, schalt, see 
sohule(n). 

schame, sb., OM. scamu (WS. 
sceamu, scamu) ,* shame, ignominy, 
42, 17; shame, 87, 13. eSth. 
scheome, 195, 30. Sth. ssaine, 207, 
16. 

sehaine(n), wkv. , OE. sceamian ; be 
ashamed, feel shame \ Sth. imp.pl. 
ssame 50, 207, 10. 

sehamlic, adj., OE. sceamllc ; shame^- 
ful, base, 153, 4. 

schap,^^., OM. gescapjWS. gesceap; 

shape, image, 62, 24. 
seharp, adj., OM. scarp (WS. scearp) ; 
sharp, 60, 6; eME. scosrp, 3, 12. 
Sth. scerp, i8d, 15. 
schaj>e, sb., OM. scatJa, WS. sceatia ; 

harm, injury, 150, 4. 
schan, sohaues, see soh©we(n). 
schaning, sb., Nth.^^Ml. schowinge; 

OE. sceawung,/ ; showing, X53,28. 
sohave(n), slv., OE. scafaii-scof (6); 

shave) pp. schave, 120, 29. 
schawed, see seh©we(n). 
sohe, sch§awe(n), see he, shewe(n). 
schfd©(n), siv,, OE. sceadan-sceod 
(k) ; sepa 7 'ate, divide, shed ; pt. pi. 
sched, 132, 19. 

sohede(n), wlcv., OM. *scedan, based 
on sceaclan, slv . ; sepaj'ate, divide, 
shed) pt. sg. schedde, 122, 22. Sth. 
pt. sg. ssedde, 208, 30, 
soheld©(n), wkv., OM. sceldan, WS. 
scieldan; shield, protect) imp. sg. 
Scheldt, 123, 20. Sth. (SEMI.), 
inf. Slide (n), 15, 6 3 4 ^- slide??, 

^7? 23 ; pr. sbj. sg. schilde, 64, 3. 
schende(n), wkv., OE. scendan, scen- 
dan ; injure, disgrace ; imp, pi. 
schende??, 195, 30; schent, 59, 
lo. Sth._^. ischende, 125, 34. 
scheome, see schame. 
soheo 3 ?tlioh©, see schortly. 
soh§p, shdp, sb., OM. seep, WS. 
sceap; sheep, 53, 3; scp~shep, 15, 
6; schep, 86, 16* 



430 


GLOSSARY 


scli.eppe(iL'), siv.^ OM. sceppan (WS. 
scieppan)~sc6p (6) ; shape, fashion^ 
crecUe\ schop,49, 17; schope, 
62, 25 ; shoope, 245, 13. eSth./A 
scop, 178, 27. 

seliete(rL), stv,, OE. sceotan-sceat 
(2); shoot, throw, pp. sciigte, 61, 
j 6. Sth. pt. sg. sscft, 207, 24 ; pp> 
aschoten (eME.), I95> 33; issgte, 
208, 20. 

scliewe(n), wkv,, OE. sceawian ; 
show\ inf. shgewenn ( 0 ), 13? 
schewe, 44, 15; shewe, 104, 13; 
pr. I sg, shewe, 227, ii ; shewed, 
91, I. Wth. inf. scaw, 130, i; 
schau, 148, 24 ; schew, 13^3 5 > 

3 sg. schaties, 150, 15; pr. ppl. 
scliewand, 144, 4 ; pt. sg. schawed, 
I55> 32 ; PP' schawed, 153, 29. 
eSth. imp.pl. schfaweSJ, 198, 31. 
Kt- inf ssewy, 216, i ; seawy, 217, 
16 ; pr. pi. seaweth, 21 1, 2% \ pt.sg. 
seawede, 213, 8. 

seEift, $b., OAng. *scift, cf. sciftan ; 
shift, turn, trick ; at a scliift, su^l- 
dcnly, 152, 19. 
schilde(xi), sec sclielde(ii). 
scliip, ship, sb., OE. scip; ship, 73, 
18 ; scip (eME.), i, 14. Sth. ssip, 
205, 15 ; pi scipen (eSth.), 185,4; 
schipes, 221, 17. 

8ebipe(n), wkv., OE. scipian; take 
ship, navigate; pt. pi. schipede, 
220, 8. 

sohipman, sb., OE. scipman; ship- 
man, sailor, 163, 13, eSth. pi. 
scipmen, 1S6, 9. 
schir, see sire. 

schire, jr 3 ., OE. scTr,y. ; shire, 237, 8. 
scho, see he. 

scho, sb., OM. scoh (sq5), WS. sceoh 
(sceo); shoe; sho, 239, 12; pi. 
schone, 120, 23. 

sehold(e), sehoUde, see sohule(n). 
sehone, see schtine(ii). 
schop, see seheppe^n). 
schom, see shfre(ii j. 
schort, adj., OM. scort, WS« sceort ; 
short; eME. scort, 3, 1 1 ; schorte, 
145, 2. eSth. sceort, 191, 2; ssort, 
215, 10. 


schortly, adv., OAng. scortllce, WS. 
sceoitlice; shortly , briefly , 133, 13. 
eSth. scheortllclie, 19S, 17. 
schgte(rL), see schete(ix). 
schotynge, ppl. as sh,, based on 
OE. sceotan ; shoothig, 120, 19^ 
schrgade, sb., eSth. = M]. schrgdc ; 
OE. scr|ade; shred, cutting; pi. 
schigaden, 202, 8. 
sohrewe, see shrewe. 
schride(xi), wkv,, OE scrydan ; 

clothe, enshroud; hf. schride,57, 7. 
schrif, see sohrive(n). 
sohrift, schryft, sb., OE. scrift; con- 
fessim, shrift, 156, 32; ds. scrifte, 
18, 19; schryfte, 109, 30. Sth. 
ssriffe, 218, 21. 

schrive(n), schr^e(n), siv., OE. 
sciifan-scraf (i); shrive; inf. 
schryve, no, 16; pp. schriven, 59, 
10; shriven, 75, 26 ; schryvyn, no, 
22. Nth. pr. sbj. sg. and pi. schrif, 
157, 3. Sth.pt. sg. schrgf, 199, 15; 
pi. pi. ssrive, 206, 20 ; pp. ischriven, 
199, t 6; ischryve, 121, 30. 
sohroud, sb., OE. scrud ; dress, gar- 
ment, shroud, 48, 20; 57, 4; P^' 
srud shrild, 31, 15. 
schrude(ii), wkv., Sth. = Ml. schri- 
de(n); OE. scrydan; dotke ; inf 
schruden, 201, 30; pp. ischriid, 
i 99 > 4 - 

schryft, see schrift. 
sohr^e(n), schryvyn, see sehri- 
ve(n). 

sGhTile(n), shnle(n), pt. prv. OM. 
sculan-scel, sccel ( W S. sceal) ; ought, 
shall; pr. i, 3 sg. schal, 37, ii; 
schale, 123, 22; schalie, 123, 5; 
pr. 2 sg. shallt (0), 9, 5 ; schal t, 49, 
8 ; pr, pi shulenn (O), 9, 23 ; 
schullen, 65, 17; schiil, 65, 20; 
schulyn, 116, 21 ; shole we, 82, 6 ; 
pt. 1, 3 sg. sculde (eME.), i, 7; 
shollde (0), 9, 17; scholde, 68, 1 5 ; 
schold, 71, 24 ; pt. 2 sg. sciildesl 
(eME.), 3, 26 ; scholdest, 49, 30 ; 
scholdist, 55, 23 ; pt. pi scholde, 
46, 13. irth. I, 3 sg. sal, 128, 
17 ; pr. 2 sg, silt, 18, 15 ; pr. pi 
sal, 133, 5; pt. sg. suld, i3S» a6> 



GLOSSARY 


431 


pt.pL snld, 130, 32 ; p(. pL sulden, 
27,32. 1 , 3 scsel (eSth. ), 

176, 21 ; sceal (eSth.)» 1/7, 2; ssel, 
215, 2; pr^ 2 sg. ssalt, 204, 18; 
sselt, 215, 2; pr. pL sollen, 212, 
I ; ssolle, 207, 18 ; scale we, 179, 
5 ; 1 , 3 sg. ssolde, 204, 8 ; pi. pi. 

solden, 213, 21; pr.2 sg. schuldest, 
194, 8 . 

schune(n), sh.mie(n\ lakv., OE. 
scimian; s/iun, avoids abhor \ inf. 
schone, 55, 8. 

schyl, sh.y OM. *scil, cogn. with ON. 

skil; reason, excuse^ 117, 14. 
scilwis, adj., ON. skilwiss ; wise in 
reason, wise, 127, 15. 
scip, scipen, see schip. 
scipmaai, see soliipinan. 

Soitia, sb. ,Lat. Scythia ; Scythia, 2 20,8. 
soli, see slio, sly^. 

seole, skole, sb., OE. scol,/., infl. by 
OF. escole?; school, skole, 

137, 29* 

scop, see sclxeppe(n). 
sogre, sb., ON. skor,/ ; score, 225, 1. 
scorn, sb., OF. escome; scorn, deH- 
szon; pi. scorncs, 218, 1 3. 
scort, see schort. 

Soot, Skot, sb., OE. Scottas, pi. ; 
Scot; pi. Scottes, 159, 12 ; Skottes, 
160, 20. Sth.^/, Scottene, 222, 14. 
Scotland, Scotland, sb., OE. Scot- 
land ; Scotiand, 2, 15 ; ds. Scot- 
l^nde, 189, 2 ; Scotland, 220, 21. 
Scottene, see Scot. 

Scottysch, Soottys, Scottes, adj., 
OE, Scyttisc, infl. by Scot; Scot- 
tish, Scotch, 221,28. Nth., Skottis, 
159 , 31 ; Scottes, 160, 7. 
scowkyng, sb., biised on root in 
sculken < ON. *sknlka ; cf. Pan. 
skulke; skniking, treacherous re- 
lation, 170, X2. 
script, see schrift. 

scrij)e(n) « aohriJ)e(n), stv., OE. 
scrltian-scratS {i) ; glide, go, Jiy\ 
eMB, inf. scrTjjen, 186, 15. 
sculde, soulen, see 8ohule(n). 
sonrn, whzf., origin nneertain; haste 7 i\ 
Nth. iff. scum, 150, 26. 
s^, see s§(n)> 


sf (se), sb., OE. SEC ; 5 ea\ eME. sss, 

1, 1$ ; sg, 19, 22 ; gs. sggs, 19, 25. 
Nth. se, 151, 17. eSth. sga, 196, 
33. Kt. see, 2 1 1, I. 

se, sb., OF. sed ; see {of a bishop), 
seat, throne, 68, 4. 

sf, se, adz/., OE. sa^ < sw^; so, 178, 
ir ; se (O), 10, 6. 

sea, see sf . 

seaweth, seawye(n), see schewo(n). 
seche(n), seke(n), whzf., OE. secean 
-sohte ; seek ; i/f. seche, 98, 28 ; 
seke, 90, 3 ; pr. 3 sg. sekeS, 15, 17; 
in/p. sg. sech, 193, 3; pr. ppl, se- 
chand (^Nlh.?), loi, 19; sechyng, 
235» 12 ; pi. sg. sogt, 23, 23; pp. 
sogt, driven, 25, l. Sth. pr. pi. 
sekeb’, 196, 13. 'Sit.pr. 3 sg. zek]), 
219, 20 ; pr. sbj. sg. zeche, 218, 29. 
seek, sb., ON. sekkr. cogn. with 
OE. sEecc, Lat. saccus; sack, bag) 
pi. seckes, 26, 21. 

seounde, adj. sb., AN. secund, OF. 

second; second, 225, 2. 
sed, sb., OM. sed, WS. seed; seed, 
offspring, 73, 10. 
sfde, see, see s|(ti), seie(n). 
sgfZ, sb., OF, seel ; seal, 326, 21. 
seen, see se(n). 

sefenfald, sb., eMEI.«Ml. sevenfold; 
OM. seofonfald, WS.-feald; 

sefennfald (O), 12, 29. eSth. 
seovevald, 195, 4. 

sefihde, sefEhe, see sevende, seven, 
sfge(n), wkv., OE. *s^gai; < sTgan ; 

sink, fail ; pr. 3 sg. sggei 5 , 27, 8. 
sejen, seggen, see se(n), seie(n). 
seghen, see se(n). 

sfgrund, sh., OE. s^gnmd (grund) ; 

boitont of the sea, 19, 19. 
seh, see so(n). 

seie(n), saie(n), wliv., OE. seegan 
-SDCgde; say\ scien, 19, 3; sei, 

2, 3 ; scegen (eME.), 4, 28; sain 

(eME.), 4, 9; seyn, U9, x; saie, 
103,23; sayne,iii, 28; say, 120, 4; 
pr. i sg. sey^e, 53, 9 ; /n 2 sg. seyst, 
112,1) pr.^sg. sey>, 05, x 8 ; scythe, 
III, 8 ; seii 5 , 179, 23; pr. sbJ. sg.sd, 
18, 19; imp. 41, 27; imp* 

pi. seiS, 30, 30 ; pt. sg. s^de, 6, 5 ; 



432 


glossary 


s|de, 37, I ; seide, 21, 19 ; seyd, 65, 
30; p. 2 5 ^. seidist, 51, 8; pLpL 
s^den (eMK.), i, 17 ; seiden, 25, 4 ; 
pp. seid, 33, 9. IKrth. inf. saine, 
160, i; pr, 2 sg. sais, 138, 6 ; seys, 
91, 25 ; pr. 3 sg. sais, 150, 1 7 ; pr. pi. 
sa she, 174, 14; pt sg. sayd, 135. 
22 ; pp. sayde, 140, 15- Sth. inf. 
seggen, 179, 3; siggen, 198, i; 
siigge, 1 8 1, 6; imp.pl sigget 5 ,i 97 , 
22 ; pr. sbf sg. segge, 179, 25 ; pr. 
sbj. pi. sigge we, 211,22; pp. iseyd, 
60, I ; yseyd, 66, 31. Kt. inf zigge, 
215, 6; pr. 2 sg. zayst, 215, Sj P^- 
3 sg. zay>, 215, 8; pt. pi. seden, 
213, i; PP^ 216, II. 
sei5, sei3©(n), see se(n). 
seil, sb., OE. segl; sail; pi. seiles, 
205, 16; seyl, 86, 27. 
sein, see saint. 

seinie(n), wku., StJi. = ML seine (n) ; 
OE. segnian ; sign, raarke widi a 
sign, bless; pp, iseined, 226, 20. 
seint, seinte, see saint, 
sek, adj., OE. seoc; sick, 59, 9. 

eSth.. seoc, 181, 9. 
seke(n), see a©clie(n). 
sek^niase, sekenes, sh., OE. seoc- 
ness,y^ ; sickness, disease; pi. seke- 
nisses, 104, 18 ; sekenes, 143, 14. 
seker, see siker, 

seking, sb., based on OE. secan ; 

seeking, search, 99, 32. 
sakyr, see sik©re(n). 
sal, sb., OM. sel, WS. sSl; time, 
occasion ; on sel, on occasion, regu- 
larly, 21,1s; sele, 95,9. 
sal, ad/., OE. sS ; good ; Sth. ds., 
sele, 183, 28 ; gpl. sHere, 186, 30. 
Seland, sb,, OE. ^Salandj Seland, 
164, 6. 

sele, sb., OE. seolc ; silk, 38, 24. 
selcuth, adj,, OE. seldcu® ; strange, 

wonderful, 127, 5, 
seld, see skeld. 

s§lde(rL), seldum, adv., OE. seiden 
(seiden) ; seldom, 134, 3 ; seide, 36, 
14; seldum, 25, 21. 

%h\Q,see sel. 

self, pm., OE. self, wk, selfa; self; 
eME. sself, 8, 2 ; self, 38, 26 ; wk. 


selve, 68, 4 ; wk.pl, selven,_ 69 , 21 ; 
combined with pers. prn, mesellfenm 
(O), 9, 8 ; miself, 44, 29 ; Myself, 
1 19, 24; fiselve, 50, 2; himmsellf 
(O), II, 23 ; himmsellfenn (O), 13, 
I ; hymself, 92, 8 ; pi. hemself, 63, 
20; hemselfe, 118, 4. ISTth. fam- 
selfe, 144, 6 ; J?aymeselfe, 146, 28. 
Sth. (eSth. seolii 182, 10; seolve, 
182, 18; seolven, 183, 23); sulf, 
177, 5; ds, siilfhe, 176, 14; com- 
bined with pars, prn. himsulf, 207, 
28 ; pi. himsiilve, 177, 8. Kt. zelve, 
2T7, g; pi ham zelve, 218, 22, 
selhiSe, sb., CM. seltJ, WS. sSlt?, /. j 
happimss, felicity, 193, 12. 
sell, adj., OM. selig, WS. s^lig; 

happy, good, 24, 10; 80, 6. 
sella (n), wlw., OM. sellan-salde 
(WS. sealde) ; sell; inf. selle, 86, 
20 ; pt. sg. sgide, 86, 15. Nth. pp. 
said, 130, 28 ; salde, 148, 22. Sth. 
pp. is^ld, 36, 16. 

sally, adj., OE. selllc < seldlic; 

strange, marvellous, 47, 27. 
selve, selven, see self, 
sfm, sh., OE. seam; horse load; pi. 
s|mes, 31, 21. 

semblaunt, sb., OF. semblant; ap- 
pearance, semblance, 42, 8. 
semble, sb,, OF. semble; meeting, 
118, 25. 

semble (n), wkv., OF. sembler; 
assemble, collect; pt, sg. sembled, 
164, 19. 

sem^ly, adj., ON. scemligr; agree- 
able, seemly, 116, 6. 
sem©(n), wkv., OE. seman ; befit, 
suit, seem; pr. 3 sg. seme^J) (O), 
9, 19; semeti, 25, 9; pr. sbj. sg. 
seme, 50, i ; pt. sg. semyd, 108, 12 ; 
pt.pL sSmede, 221, 9, Nth, pr. 
3 sg. semes, 145, 6. 
sen, see si]>J)en. 

se(n), stv,, OM. seon-sseh (WS. 
seah) (5) ; see, look after, care for ; 
inf. sen, 9, 10; seen, 33, 22 ; seo, 
37, 2; 2 sg. sest, 81, 9; syst, 

124, II ; pr. 3 sg. se6, 15, 20; pr. 
pi. sen, 20, 1 ; sene, 124, i ; pr.sbj, 
sg. se, 17, 15 ; i^P^ se, 102, 5; 



GLOSSAJilY 


433 


pL sg. sahh (O), 12, 25; sag, 27, 
29; saii5, 47, 27; say, 58, 13; 
sei5e, 67, iS ; sagh, 89, 29; sye, 
108, 29 ; sawe, 113, i ; pt,pL se5e 
< sesen, 41, 24; seijen, 103, 18; 
pt. sbj. sg. sawe, 79, 12; sgge, 19, 
4; pp. seyn, 63, 19; sen?, 85, 4. 
!Krth. inf. se, 127, 15 ; pt. sg. se}^ 
132, 26; sagh, 133, 8; pp. sene, 
129, lo. Sth. pr. pl. se]>, 209, 7; 
pr. sbj. sg. seo (eSth.), 195 j 23 ; pt. 
sg. seh, 194, 12; sei5, 229, 29 ; pt. 
pi. sye, 223, 16. TL%.pr. 3 sg. zy)), 
219, 26; pr. ppl. zyinde, 216, 8; 
pt. pi. seghen, 21a, 16 ; pp. y2y5]>, 

216, 8. 

seiiclie(n), wkv.^ OE. sencan ; cause 
to sii^, sink^ drown ; pi. sg. senchte, 
197: 3* 

sende(n), wkv.^ OE. sendan (sendaii) ; 
send', pr. 3 sg. sende'S, 31, 31; 
s^t, 64, 24; pr. pi. senden, 27, 16 ; 
pr. sbj. sg. sende, 177, 3; pt. sg. 
sende, i, 4; sennde (O), 12, 13; 
sente, 24, 31 ; sent, 65, 21 ; pt. pi. 
senden, 2, 9 ; pp. sent, 28, 18. Kth. 
pt. pi. send a= sendit, 171, 1 4. Sth. 
pr. pi. sendet for sende]?, 177, 22; 
pt. sg. senden, 184, 32; pp. isent, 
42, I ; ysent, 69, 16. Kt. inf. zend, 

217, 10. 
sene, see se(n). 

Seneca, sb., Lat. Seneca ; Seneca, 
200, 31. 

Senek, sb., OF. Senek ; Seneca, 238, 
10, 

senne, seo, see sinne, se(n). 
sSoo, see sek. 

seolf, seolve, seolven, see self. 

seolver, see silver. 

seotel, sb., e3VC!EJ.=«ML sellel; OE. 

setl, setol; seat, settle, 195, ii. 
seoiJSan, see si]?]>en. 
seove(n), seovene, see seven, 
seoveniht, see sevenyht. 
seovevald, see sefenfald. 
seowen, s§p, see so'W'e(n), soli§p. 
ser, adJ.j ON. ser ; several, vanous ; 

pi. sere, 126, 2; ser?, 135, 3. 

.s§r, adj., OE. sear ; sear, 69? 9- 
Seresherf C^ereberi), sb., OE. 


Searobnrh (-byrig'); based on Lat. 
Sorbiodnniim ; Salisbury, Old 
rum (^Wiltshire); eME. Roger of, 
I, 5; 2, 24. 

serfulli, adv., OM. ” serhfullic ? ; cf. 
Onn’s sen'hfull ; sorrowfully, 48, 

8 . 

serjaunt, servant, sh., OF. sergant, 
-jani ; se?gcant. man of la%u, 98, 5 ,* 
sergant, 212, 12. 

serk, sb., ON. serkr, cogn. with OE. 

sere; shirt, Scotch sark, 83, 16. 
serm6ne(n), sb., OF. seraioner; 
preach, 245, 18. 

sertayne, sertis, see certain, certes. 
serva^e, sb., OF. servage; service, 
servitude, 94, 16. 

servande, sb., OF. servant, modified 
by pr. ppl. of serven?; servant, 
147, 28. 

serve (n), %vkv., OF. servir; serve*, 
pr. pi. serven, 39, 23; pt.sg. servede, 
21, 15; pt.pl. serveden, 213, 30; 
pp. served, 48, 2. Sth. inf. servi, 
195, 2. 

serves, see servise. 
sorvie(n), see fi3rv©(n). 
servise, servys, serves, sb., OF. 
service; service, 212, i; serves, 
144, 27 j serves, 120, 4. 
sfse(n), sfsi(n), wkv., OF. saiser; 
put in possession of, take possession 
of, seize; pt, sg. s|syd, 115, 23. 
sf39nd, sh., OE. s5e + sand (sgnd) ; 
sea sand, 19, 6 . 

sesse(n), wkv., OF. cesser; cease; 
pr. sbj. pi. sesse, 146, 15. Cf. 
cfso(n). 
sest, see s§(n). 

sfsyde, sh., OE. ste+bide; seaside, 
222, 12. 

sfte, sb., ON. saili; seat, 105, lo. 
sete, adj., ON. sceta, cogn. with OE. 
swete ; sweet, agreeable, pleasing, 
56. 15' 

set, sete, sete, sete(n), see sitte(n). 
Se]^, sb., OE. Seth, Lat. Seth ; Seth, 
64. 9- 

se]>, see s§(n), 

sethin, se]>]>en, sebthe, see sijppen. 
S0tte(n), whv., OE. settan; place, 

f 



434 


GLOSSARY 


set\ pt sg-. sette, 4, 13; sett, loi, 
3 ; setted, 104, 3; pi* setten, 
60, 25 ; sette, 35, 27 ; pp, sett (O), 
9, 7 ; set, 23, 7. Sth. pp. isjct 
(eME.), 183, 3; iset, 200, 24. 
seurte,^^., OF, seurte ; surety^ pledge^ 

II4. 15- 

seven, seve, adj.^ OE. seofan ; sffven j 
pi seffne (0), ii, 15; serene, 15, 
21; seve, 42, 12. eSth. seovene, 
177,4; seove, 180, 20. Kt. zeve, 
21 8, 20. 

sevend©, OE. seofotfa ; seventh^ 
147,11; seffnde(O), 12, iS ; seven 
~ sevend, 71 » 9- 

seventi, adj.^ OE. seofontig ; seventy^ 

103, 9- . , 

sevenyglit, OE. seofon + niht,//.; 
seven^nigkt, week, sennight, 109, 
18. eSth. seoveniht, 201, 3. 
sevepe, adj,, Sth., OE. seofotJa ; 

seventh, 2 Cf. sevend©.^ 

sex, six, adj,, OM. sex, WS. siex, 
six; six\ sexe, 15, 21 ; six, 223, 31. 
Sexisok, adj., OE. Sexisc; Saxon, 
of the Saxon ; mas. Sexisne « Sex- 
isdine, 186, 21. 

Sexlpnd, sb., OE. Seaxland(lgnd) ; 
land of the Saxons, 185, 16; ds. 
Sexlgnde, 1S9, i. 

sexte, adj., OM, sexta, WS. siexta 
(sixta) ; sixth, 12,11; syxte, 223, i. 
sexti, sixti, adj., OAng. sextig, WS. 
siextig, sixtig (sextig) ; sixty ; sextl 
fot, sixty feet, 151, 22 ; sixti, 4, 24. 
Kt, zixtT, 216, 6. 
sey(n), see se(n). 
seyde, sey^e, see seie(xi). 
seyl, see seit. 

seylie(n), wkz/., Sth.. = M1. seile(n) ; 
OE. seglian; sail; pt.pl. seylede, 
221, 2. 

seyn, ses S0ie(n), se(ii.). 
seynt, seyate, see saint, 
seyntwary, sd., OF, saintuaire, sain- 
tuairie; sanctuary, ;£-24, 25. 
shadow©, sb., OE. sceadu, acc, 
sceadwe,f; shadow, loi, 5. 
shadow©(n), wkv., OE. sceadwian; 
shadow, shade; inf shadow, 103, 
26. 


sh£iwe(n), see schewe(ii). 
shaft©, sb., OE. sceaft, /. ; created 
thing, creature, creation; shaffte 
(O), 12, 32 ; schaft,49, 1 7. Cf.seaft. 
shallt, see sohTil©(ii). 
shame, see schame. 
shanke, sb., OE, sceanca, scanca; 

shank, leg, 229, 14. 
shape(n), wkv., OM. scapian (WS, 
sceapian) ; shape ; inf. shape, 243, 
17; pp. shaped, 77, 27. 
shave(n), stv., OM. scafan (WS. 
sceafan) -scof (6) ; shave, scrape ; 
pp. shaven, 23, 24. 

sheld, sb,, OM. sceld (sceld), WS. 
scield ; shield, 79, 28 ; seld = sheld, 

i7» 23. 

shenk0(n), wkv., OE. scencan; pour 
out; pr. pi shenke, 60, 20. 
shep, see schep. 

shfre(n), stv,, OE. sceran-scaer (4) ; 
shear, cut, reap ; inf shfreii, 30, 
2^ \ pp. schorn, 57, 26. 
shewe(n), see sohewe(n). 
shilde(n;, see schelde(3i), 
shine(n), stv., OE. sclnan-scan (i) ; 
shine; pr. 3 sg. shyne??, 228, 12; 
pp. sinen, 14, 10. 

shir, adj., OE. scTr; bright, clear, 
pure, 83, I. 

sho, schole, shollde, see scho, 
sohule(n). 

shoope, see sohepp0(n). 
shrewe, schrewe, sb,, OE. scxeawa ; 
shrew, evil person ; pi. shrevves, 97, 
2 ; schrewes, 1 21, 7. 
shriven, see schrive(n). 
shryn, sb., OE. serin ; shrine ; ds. 
shryne, 227, 20. 

shuldre, sh., OE. seuWor,//. sculdni ; 
shoulder, 83, 17;//* shulderis, 103, 
26. Sth.//. ssoldren, 207, 18. 
shulen(n), sholde, see schul0(n). 
shyne(n), see shin©(n), 
shynyng, pr. ppl. as sb. , OE. scmencl ; 

shining, glory, 103, tg. 
si, see be(n), >0. 

sib, syb, ac^\, OE. sibb; related, 
friendly; pi sybbe, 144, 14. 
sib, sh., OM. sibb, f, later neut. ; 
pecut, concord, 7, 17. 



GLOSSARY 


435 


sic, see swilc, 

side, sd., OE. side; side, 46, 10; pL 
siden, 76, 6 ; on syde, aside^ 7iear 
j)y, 169, 25. 

sig§e(n), sight (e), see seie(iL), siht. 
sign, sb., OF, signe ; sign, 199, 30. 
signefiance, sb,, OF. signifiance ; 

significance, 212, 27. 
sigt, si^t, see siht. 
sihe(n), stv,, OE. slgaii-sag(h) (i*) ; 
glide, fall, rise; sihen, 196, 

27. 

siht, sigt, sijt, sight, sights, sb., 
OE. gesiht, gesihtS,/. ; sight; sigte, 
16, 22; sy5t, 47, 27; si5ht, 55, 9; 
siht, 156, 17 ; sighte, 242, 10. Kt. 
zy5])e, 215, T2. 

sihoe, sb,, OE. gesihd,/.; sight, vision, 
197, 14. Cf. siht. 

sike(n), stv,, OE. sican-sac (i) ; sigh, 
groan; pr, 3 sg, slketS, 196, 15. 
siker, adj,, ON.?, cf, Dan. sikker, 
OFris. siker < Lat. securiis; su?'e, 
secure; sekei, 150, 30, eSth. ds, 
sikere, 177, 18. 

sikere(ii), whv,, cf. OFris. siknra; 
mahe sure, secure ; inf sekyr, 
no, 4. 

sikerlSohe, sikerlike, siker like 
(lyke), sycUTly, adv., ON. ?, cf. 
Dan. sikker, OFxis. siker, Lat. 
seenrns ; ceHainly, truly, 16, 22; 
sikerlike, 77, 25; sikerlyke, 107, 
10; sycurly, 124, 12; Sth, sikei- 
llche, 200, 17, 
silden, see schdlde(n). 
silence, sb>, OF, silence; silence, 199, 
26. 

silver, sb., OM. siolfor, seolfor; silver, 
26, 22 ; sylvre, 2, 5; sylver, 2, 22 ; 
eSth. seolver, 1S9, 4. 

Silvins, sb., Lat. Silvias; Silvius 
Posthttmus, 220, 2. 

Simon, sb., OF. Simon ; Sinwn, 
22lt, I. 

sin, sinden, see siJ)]jen, ’be(n), 
sinen, see shine(n). 
sinegia^, sb., OE. syngnng, f ; 
sinning, 18, ii. 

sinfol, mj,, OE. synful ; sinful, 16, 
17 * 


singe (n), siv., OE. singan-sang (59ng) 
Nth. /r. 3 sg. singes, 
76, 26. Sth. pr. ppl. singinde, 196, 
27. 

sin^fre, sinnifr, synnfr, sb., based 
on OE. synnig, ‘ sinful ’ ; sinner ; 
//. sinsfres, 100, 16; sinnifrs, 100, 
23; synnfrs, 100, 25; synsfrs, 
104, 2. 

singinde, see singe (n). 
sinigeden, see synne(n). 
sinke(n), siv., OE. sincan-sanc (3) ; 
sitik; hf. sinken, 20, 10; pt.pl. 
sonken, 63, 20; suncken, 197, 6. 
Sth.pp. isnnken, iSS, 31. 
sinndenn, see be(n). 
sinne, synne, sb., OE. syn(n), f; 
sin; pi. sinnes, 4, 9 ; synjes, 104, 
26. Nth. syne, 144, 10; pi. syns, 
137, 19. Sth. pi. siinnen, 196, 7. 
Kt. senne, 211, 20; zenne, 216, 22; 
pi. zennes, 218, 12. 
sip, see sohip. 

sire, syr, syr, sh , OF. sire ; sire, sir; 
sire, 40, 3 ; syr, 108, 30; syr, no, 
13. Nth. sir, 137, 8; schir, 166, 9. 
sise, sb.. OF. assise; session, meeting, 
set your sise, made your compact, 

B 7 , 15* 

sister, syster, sb., ON. syster, cogn. 
■with OE. sweostor, IWS. swystor; 
sister, 77, 14; pi. systeren, 116, 20; 
systeres, 118, 32. Cf. suster. 
site, sb,, ON. syti ; sorrow, p. 294. 
site(n), site, see sitte(n), cite, 
si]>, sipe, sb., OE. sitJ, m. ; time, 
occasion; ds. sijje, 10, 3; //. sipe, 
42. 12. 'KX.pl. zljie, 218, 20. 
sith(-on), silSen, sipin, sythen, see 
sippen. 

sippen (seppen), sippe, si^on, sipin, 
sin, adv., OE. si?^*6an ; afterwards, 
since; sitiSan (eME.), 2,13; sythen, 
4, 32; sippenn (O), n, to; sithon, 
3, 31 ; sifiien, 15, 12 ; si|)in, 49, 27 ; 
sippe, 39, 6; syth, 110,1 ; sin, 52, 30; 
seppen, 65, 29, Nth. sethin, 137, 
5; sen, 135, 33; syne, 168, 20. 
Sth. seoSSan (eSth.), 182, 7; 
septhe, 224, 27; sotSSen, 196, 28; 
sutytie, 179, 28; siipthe, 224, 20. 


F f 2 



436 


GLOSSARY 


sitt©(ix), sfv.y OE. sittan-sset (5); sit, 
remain; inf, sitten, 3, 17 ; /n 2 sg, 
sittest, 62, 23 ; pr, 3 sg, sit (sitt) = 
sittej), 67, 17; pr.ppL sittende, 3, 
26; syttyng, 93, 21; ^r, sbj, sg, 
sitte, 199, II ; imp, pi, sittetJ, 184, 
5 ; sitte Be, 201, 29 ; pi, sg, (eME.) 
saet, 183, 27; sat, 52, 14; sate, 89, 
ji ; pt, pi, sate, 89, 2 ; pt, sbj. sg, 
sete, 19, 6 ; pp, sete, 58, 6. Nth, 
pr, 3 sg. sittes, 62, 27 ; pp. sittyn, 
174, 25; pr. ppl, sytand, 173, 26. 
Sth.. pt. sg. set, 195, II ; pt. pi, 
sgten, 201, 2. 
six, see sex. 

sixtentSe, adj., OE. sixteo^^a, infl. by 
sixtene; sixteenth, 197, 8. 
sixti, see sexti. 

skant, adj., ON. scamt, neut. of 
skammr, ‘ short ’j scant, 143, 21. 
skarsli, adv., OF. escars + ME. li ; 
scarcely, 143, 20. 

skie, sh,, ON. sky, n . ; sky, cloud; pi, 
skies, 15, 21. 

skil, sb,, ON. skil; discrimination, 
reason, skill, 49, 18; skill (0), 9, 
28 ; ds. skylle, 88, 7. 
skole, Skottis, see scole, Scottysch. 
skylle, see skil. 

skyn, sb., ON. skinn ; skin, 241, 3. 
slad(e), sb., OE. slosd n. ; slade, grass- 
land; eME.//. slades, 187, 5. 
slsin, see sl9(n). 

slafr, sb., based on sla, ‘ strike, kill’; 

slayer; pi, slagrs, 147, 4. 
slagen, see 819(31). 

slake (n), OE. slacian ; loose, 

set free, slack; pr, 3 sg. slaket", 17, 
4 ; pp. slaked, 159, 5. 
sla(n), siv., ONth. sla (WS. slean)- 
sloh(g) (6) ; strike, slay, kill ; mf. 
sla, 158, 30 ; slay < pr. 3 sg. 152, 
8 ; pr, sbj, sg. slaa, I47, 2 ; pt, sg. 
slogh, 131, 16;//.//. sloghje, 160, 
17 ; slew, 171, 2 : pp. slane, 173,10. 
slauglitre, sb., ON. slahtr, infl. by 
slahtra, ‘ to slaughter ’ ; slaughter, 
massacre, 233, 8. 

slaw0(n), ze/i&., eME., OE. slawian; 
be slow, neglect; inf slawen, 177, 

13^ 


slay, slayn, see sla(n), 319(31). 
sle, sleep, see 8 lo( 3 i). 
sleghpe, sb., ON. sl^g^,/. ; device, 
sleight, 125, 27. 

sleip, slf( 3 i), slf fn, see slep,_sl9(n). 
slep, sb,, OM. slop, WS. sleep, Gt. 
slep; sleep, i, 14; ds. slepe, 14, 9. 
Nth. sleip, i 72 j .31- 
sl§pe(3i), Sth. slgpe(n), stv., OM. 
slepan (WS. sl£epaii)-slep (R) ; 
sleep ; inf. slepen, 3,18; ger, to 
slepen, 14, 12; pr. ppl, slepinge, 
39, 32 ; pt. sg. slep, 4, 8. Nth. pr, 
ppl, slepand, 154, 29. Sth, inf, 
slgpen, 203, 10. 

slepyng, sb. < pr. p. of slepe(n ) ; 
sleeping, 17 ’ 

sleuth, sb., INth. == ML slop ; ON. 

sloS; track, 166, 21. 
sleupe, sb., OE. s1kw?5, f. ; sloth, 
idleness, 209, 13. 

sleuthhuud, sb,, ON. sloti + OE. 
hund, hund ; sleuth-hound, tracking 
hound, 166, 20. 
slewe, sley, see 319(31), sly^. 
sH, slio (slik), adj., ON. slikr, cogn. 
with OE. swylc; such; slz, 128, 
16 ; sell, 129, 32 ; sllc, 149, 29. 
sli, see sly5. 

sliiige(n), siv., OE. slingan-slang 
(3) ; sling, fling', pt. pi. slongen, 
63, 16; pp. sloungen, 61, 19; 
slonge, 208, II. 

sl9(u), slf (31), stv., OM. slan, slean 
(WS. slean) -sloh(g) (6); strike, 
slay, kill; inf. slan (eME.), 184, 
9 ; slf (NEMl.), 80, 19 ; slggn 
(SEMI.), 23S, 9; imp, sg, slf, 120, 
16; pt. sg, slogh, 163, 25 ; sloh, 186, 
1 7 ; sloii, 80, 8; slou5, 220,21 ; pt.pl, 
slSghen, 5,9; slowe, 208,12; slewe, 
1 10, 28 : pp. slagen, 30, 1 ; slayn, 53, 
6. Sth. inf. slggn, 240, 3; sl^ 
(eME.), 183, g; pr. 3 sg. slggth, 
239, 14; imp. sg. slf, 233, 21 ; pp. 
islajen, 186, 26; yslawe, 244, 28; 
yslayn, 239, ti, Cf, Nth. sla. 
alonge( 3 i), slousigeii , 319(31), 

sloupe, sb., OE. slaw?J, f, infl, by 
slaw; sloth, laziness, 120, 12, 
slowe, see 8l§(n). 



GLOSSARY 


437 


slycht, sif,, ON. slceg??, /. ; device, 
sleight, 1 66, 14. Cf. Ml. sleghj)e. 
sly^j^sli (sell), adj., ON. slcegr 
(slagr), earlier, ME. sleh ; cunning, 
skilful, sly, 62, 25. Sth. sley, 
200, 6. 

slyly, adv,, ON. slcegr + ME. ly ; sWy, 
242, 29. 

Slyttyng, sb., OE. *sliltinig, f, cf. 
OE. slitan, stv , ; slitting, piercing, 
225, 25. 

sinset, see sraite(n). 
smaken, OE. smseccan, smeccan, 
or *sinacian ? ; taste, smack, smell ; 
inf smaken, S77icll, 33, 27 ; ;!>f. sbj, 
sg^ smake, 14, 2. 

smal, adj., OE. smsel; small, thin', 
pL siaale, 23, 11. 
smart, see smarts. 
smeccEunge, sb., OE. *sniecciing,/. ; 
iastmg, 197, 14. 

smeeh, sb., OM. smec, WS. *siniec 
(smlc, smyc) ; vapor, smoke ; ds. 
smecEe, 176, 18. 

smel, sb., smell, 62, i8 ; nfse smel, 
S7neU of his 7tose, 14, 2. 
smelle(a), wkv,, based on OE. smel, 
sb.\ smell \ inf smelle, 49, ii. 
smeorte, sb., eME. «= Ml. smerte ; 
OE. ’•‘smeorte, cf. smeortan ; grief 
sorrow, 179, 25. 

smfr0(n), wkv,, OE. smeriaii ; stnear, 
anoint'; f-^smfren, 33, 26; pt.pL 
smfred, 34, 8 ; pp. smfred, 34, 10. 
smerles, sb., OE. smerels ; oini?7ient, 

7 - , ... 

smart, earlier smarts, adv., OE. 
*smeorte, cf. smeortan; smartly, 
quickly, 92, 30. 

smerte, smart, adj,, OE. *smeorte ; 

smaTi; Nth. smart, 128, 8. 
smartly, adv., OE. *sraeortltce, cf. 
smeortan ; smartly, briskly, 1^8, 

smit, see smite (n). 

smite, sb., OE. *smite, cf. MLG. 

smite ; blow, stroke, part, 69, 24. 
smj[ta(tiL), stv., OE. smitan-smat (i) ; 
smtar, cast, smite, go\ pr, 3 sg, 
smit » smitety, 19, 9 ; pt sg, sm§t, 
60, 24; smg^t, 239, 15; pi, pi. 


smiten, 23, 13. Nth. inf smit, 
152, 6. eSth.^if. sg, smat, 182, 5. 
smgke, eME. smoke, sb.^ OE. smoca ; 

S77ioke, 62, 16; smoke, 3, 6. 
smgken, eME. smoken, wkv., OE. 
smocian; s? 7 ioke; pi, pL smoked 
(eME.), 3, 6. 

sm99t, smgt, see smita(ii). 
smojier, sb,, OE.*smor?Jor,cf.smorian, 
choke, ‘ smother ’ ; dense smoke, 62, 
16. 

smyttyng, sb„ OE. *smittung,y;, cf. 

smittian; S7}tearmg, 221, 7. 
snake, eME. snake, sb., OE. snaca; 
snake, 3, 10. 

snarre, sb., OE. sneam ; snare', pL 
snarrys, 145, 14. 

snail, adj., OE. snell; quick, active, 
497 9 * 

snow, sb,, OE. snaw ; snow ; snow?, 
102, 10. 

39 (so), soche, see SW9, swilc. 
socore, socour, sochre, see sucur, 
soden, see suden. 

sodenlych, sodeynlych, adv,, OF, 
soudain + Sth. lych ; suddenly, 223, 
33 - 

Sodom, sh,, OF. Sodom, displacing 
OE. Sodoma ; Sodom, 73, 23. 
so£Ere(n) (sofare(n)), see snfEre(n). 
softs, adj., OE. sefte, infl. by softe, 
adv. \ soft, mild, peaceable, 2, 27. 
softs, OE. softe; softly, 53, 23. 
sgge, sogt, see se(n), seche(n). 
S9j6rne(n), wkv., OF. sojourner; seh 
journ ; inf sgjome, 108, 20. 

S9las, sb., OF. solas, sollas; solace, 
216, 27. 

soUdi, sb., Lat. solidiis-i; shillings, 
4, 24. 

soUen (solden), see schtile(n). 
som, somdfl, see sum, sumdfl. 
som^, adv., OE. samod, somod; 

together, 187, 25. 
somer, see sumer. 

somer, sh,, OF, somier, sumer; sump- 
ter horse, 48, 32. 

somnien, wkv,, Sth. «= Ml. somne(n) ; 
OE. samnian, sdmnian; asseiJihle; 
pt, sg, somnede^ x88, 32;^, isomned, 
185, 27. 



438 


GLOSSARY 


somondr, OF. semoneor; sum- 
mofur, Q^ppcritor^ 117, 33 . 
soiiioune(ii), somounyn, wkv.^O'^. 
somuner; summon; mf, somounyn, 
3J PP* somouned, 118, 25; 
sompned, 233, 13. 
son, see sune, sunne. 

E6n(s6na), see sone, 
s§nd, sh.^ OE. sand, sgnd ; sa7td^ 86, 
24; as. spnde, 105, 24. 
spnde, OE, sand , sgnd,/l ; sending^ 
messenger; dish of food, course at 
dinner^ 29, 7; pL sgndes, 25, 5, 
Sth./Z.sgnde, 186, 5; sgnden, 192, 
13* 

sgnde = slignde, sh.^ OM. scand, 
sc§nd, WS. sceand, ; disgrace^ 
ignominy^ 20, 18. 
sgnden, see sgnde, 'sending*, 
sone, see sune, sunne. 
sone, son, adv., OE. sona ; soon^ 2,1; 
sona, 2, II ; son, 155, 18. llSTtli. 
soyn=s6n, 166, 3, 

Sonenday, see sunnendai. 
sgnge, s^., OE. sgng ; song, 124, 27. 
sonken, see sinke(n). 
sonne, see sunne. 
sonnebfna, see sunuobfm. 
sgpe, s 3 ., OE. sape; soap, 198, 28. 
Sophie, s 3 ., eSth. =* Ml. Sgphle; 

OF. Sophie; Sophia, 196, 28. 
sorcerye, sb., OF. sorcerie ; sorcery, 
J 46 > 16. 

sgre, adzf., OE. saxe ; sorely, 20, 
24. 

sore^en, see sorge. 
sorful, sorhful, OE. sorhfull; 
sorrowful, 30, 6, eSth. sorhful, 
186, 22. Cf. sorowful. 
sorge, sore5e, sorow(e), sorwe, sb,, 
OE, sorh(g),/. ; sorrow, 22, 18; 
sorese, 37, 8 ; sorwe, 26, 12 ; sorow, 
P3> sorowe, 103, ii. Sth. 
(SEMl.)//.sore3en, 41, 10; sorjen, 
182, 36; sorghen, 2 it, 18. Nth. 
soni, 151, 30; pi. sorous, 143, i. 
Kt. zor^e, 215, 13; pi, zeroes, 217, 
12. 

sorful, see sorful. 
sgri, sgry, adj., OE. sarig; sorry, | 
24, 3 ; sgry, 240, 21, | 


sorinesse, sb., OE. sarigness, f. ; 

sorrow, compassion, 44, 8. 
sorow(e), serwe, see sorge. 
sorowful, adj., OE. soihful, infl. by 
OE. sorh-sorwe, ME. sorge, sorow ; 
sorrowful, 102, 23. 
soru, sorous, sorwe, see sorge. 
sgry, see sgri. 

sot, sote, adj., sb., OF. sot ; foolish, 
fool, sot; sot, 177, 6 ; sote, 126, iS. 
sop, so®, soth, adj., sb., OE. sob" ; 
true, archaic sooth, 10, 24; so®, 
22, 27; soth, 52, 16; to sope, 
archaic to sooth, in truth, 10, 10 ; 
comp, pi. s5®ere, 1S8, 20. INth. 
suth, 136, 9; soth^, 146, 2. Kt. 
z6>, 21 6, 3. 

sopefast, adj., OE. so^ftest; true, 
149, II. 

sopenes, sb., OE. *s6®nes, f ; truth, 
102, 7. 

sd®ere, see sop. 

so®Sen, see sippen. 

sotlioe, adv., OF. sot + OE. lice; 

foolishly, 2, 21. 
soule, see sowle. 

soulehfale, sb., eME. = Ml. soule- 
hfle ; OE. sawol + h»l, h^le, f . ; 
sozd health or safety, salvatiozi, 200, 
1.3- 

soulengde, sb., ME. soule + nede ; 

need of the soul, salvation, 51, 5. 
soulevode, sb., Sth. = Ml. soulefbde ; 

OE. sawul + foda; soul food, 200, 12. 
soun, sb,, AN. sun, OF. soun(son) ; 
somzd, 225, 12. 

soune(n), wkv., OF. suner; sound; 
^th./r. 3 sg. sounes, 146, 2. 
souning, sb., OF. sun, NF- soun + 
ME. ing(e) ; sotinding, pronuncia- 
tion, 225. 20. 
south (soup), see su®. 
soupe^on,a^^V,OE. su^eme ; southern, 
224, II. 

sowe(n), stv,, OE. sawan-seow (R) ; 
sow, plant ; inf. sowen, 30, 27 ; pt. 
pi. seowen (eME.), 176, 22. 
sowle, soule, sb., OE. sawol,/. ; soul; 
gs. sowles, 16, 28 ; soule drink, soul 
drink, xS, 18. Cf, sawle, saule. 
soyn, see sonp. 



GLOSSARY 


439 


$pac, epSche, see spfke(n), speche. 
spafc, spak, see spfke(ii). 

Spallding, sb,^ Spalding (Lincoln- 
shire), 8, lo. 

spixe, OE. spser; spare^ simgy, 
124, 28. 

spaj:e(n), Sth. sparTe(n), whv», OE. 
sparian; spare \ pr. sbj, pL spare 
])ey, 124, 5. Sth. inf. sparien, 202, 
7 ; imp.pl. (eSth.), sparie, 195, 29. 
sparkle, OE. spearka, extended ; 

sparky sparkle ; pi, sparkles, 61, 25. 
Spaygne, sb.^ OF. Spaine; Spain, 
46, I. 

spec, see sp§ke(n). 

spfoe, sb., OF. spece, spice; spice, 
49,11. Cf. spice, 
speche (spfehe), sb., OM. spec, WS. 
spjec,/ ; speech, language, discourse, 
50, 29 ; spffiche (O), 10, 20 ; 

spgche (?), 59, 2. Sth. spfehe, 
I 99 > 7 * 

special, specyal(l), adj., OF. espe- 
cial ; special, beloved, 154, 6 ; 
specyal, 95, 14; specyil, 146, 18; 
in special, especially, 233, 26. 
speoiali, adv., OF. especial + ME, li; 
specially, 146, 16. Sth. specialych, 
225, 25 ; specialich, 236, 26. 
speoi^te, j^,,OF.especialte ; specially, 
particdily, 174, 2. 
specialych, see special!, 
specyal, see special. 

sped, sh. , OE. sped, f ; speed, good 
fortune, success, 24, 10. 

spede(n), wkv., OE. spedan ; speed, 
proper*, inf speden, 29, 15 ; pt, sg. 
spedde, 7, 3, 

spek, sb., iSTth. *=M 1 . speche; OAng. 
spec, WS. spffic,/. ; speech, discourse, 
170, / 5 - 

spfkeni), stv.,<ys,. specan-spoec (5); 
spectk*, inf. spfke, 38, 27; pr. 3 sg. 
spfke??, 198, 5 j pr. sbj.pl. spfken, 

197, 15 ; imp. pi. spfke 5e, 199, 9 ; 
pr. ppl. spfkyng, 98, 29; pt. sg. 
spac, o, 2 ; spak, 42, 21; spake, 
105, j8; pt.pl. spgken, 76, 7 ; spak, 
89, 9, eSth. inj. speke, 176, 9; 
speoken, 193, 17. Sth. pt. sg. spec, 
199, 6. 


spfle(n), wkv., OE. spelian; spell, 
take place of, atone for, spare ; inf. 
spfle, 63, 4. 

spell, sb., OE. spell; speech, na7Tative, 
MnE. spell \ eSth. dpi, spellen, 1 84, 
I ; pi. spelles, 184, 6. 
spelle(n), wkv.,OYA. spellian ; narrate, 
spell, speak \ inf. spellenn, 9, 4. 
M-th.^r. I sg. spell, 134, 7. 
spellunge, sb., OK spellung,^ ; ecu'- 
versation, discourse, ig*j, 14. 
speiide(n.), wkv., OE. aspendan ; 

spend', Sth. ispend, 176, 12. 
speoken, see sp|ke(n). 
spfre, sb., OE. spere; spacer, 61, 23, 
eSth.^/. speren, 189, 29. 
spfre(ii), wkv., ON. sperra ; fasten ; 
inf. spfren, 26, 2; pp. sperrd (O), 
12, 26 j sperd, 21, 3. 
spew0(n), siv., OE. spTwan-spavv 
(i) ; spew, vomit \ pr. 3 sg. speweW, 


17, 10, 

spice, OF. espice; spice', pi. spices, 
27» 23. 

spicelike, adv., OF. espice + OE. 

lice; with spices, 33, 27. 
spie, sb., OF, espie; spy, 56, 19; pi. 
spies, 25, 9. 

spi0(n), wl^., OF. espier; spy, ex* 
plore ; inf. spien, 25, 12, 
spille(ii), wkv., OE. spillan; spill, 
destroy', inf, spylle, 113, 10; pp. 
spylte, III, 12. Nth. hif. spill, 
137, II, Sth. pp. yspild, 219, 18. 
spfken, see spfke(n). 
spolisebrf k,af^' ,OF. espuse + OAng. 
brece, WS. brgece; adulterous, 

, 7 - 

spoiisie(n), see spiise(n). 
sprang, see springe(n). 
spra-ale(n), wkv., OE. spreawlian; 

sprawl', pt.pl. sprauleden, 79, 14. 
sprf de(n), wkv., OE. sprsedan ; 
spread', inf. sprfde, 133, 18; pt. 
pi. spied, 89, 3 ; spredden, 228, 18. 
sprenge(n), wkv., OK sprengan; 
make to spring, sprinkle ; pr. 2 sg. 
sprengest, 102, 8; pr.pl. sprengen, 
189, 29. 

sprtQg:e(n), siv., OE. springan-sprang 
(3) ; sjinng-, fr. 3 sg. springeC, 15, 



440 


GLOSSARY 


17; pt. s^, springe, 228, 10; pLpI, 
sprongen, 61, 25. Uth. pi. sg. 
sprang, 143, 12. Sth. p)\ pi. 
springe?y, 202, 14. 

sp'al5e(n), spoils despoil \ pp. 

spnljeit, p. 292. 

spiase(n), wkv>, OF. espouser; es- 
pouse, betroth^ 77 iarry'^nf. spusen, 
46, 20. Sth.. inf. spousl, 204, 4. 
spylte, see spille(n). 
sguyere, sb.^ OF. esquiere; squire \ 
pL squyers, 98, 5. 

squyler, sb.^ OF. escuelier ; scullion^ 
99 ^ 13 - _ 

srud, see schroud. 
ssalt, ssame, see schule( 3 i), schame. 
sscft, see schete(n). 
ssed — shed, sb.^ Sth. = Ml. shade ; 
OE. scead (sczed) ; shade^ shadow^ 
215, iS. 

ssedde, see sehfde(n). 
sselt, see sGhule(ii). 
ssetare = schetare, -fre, sh,^ based 
on OE. sceotend or *sceotere ? ; 
shooter^ bozvman; pLQ) ssetare, 
208, 19. 

ssewy, ssip, see sche-we(n), schip. 
ssoldren, see shuldre. 
ssoUe, ssolde, see schtile(n). 
ssort, ssrift, see short, shrift, 
ssrive, see sc]irive(n). 
stabell, adj.f OF. estable ; 

stable, brave', pi. stabell, 126, 13. 
stable(n), wku., OF. establir ; estab- 
lish-, pp. ystabled, 223, 15. 
stabylnes, sb., OF. estable + ME.nes ; 

stableness, stability, 145, 4. 
stad, steal, see stede, s^e(n), 
staf, sb., OE. stsef ; staffs 241, i. 
sta^e, sb., OF, estage ; stage, period, 
127, 32. 

stah, staal, see stige(n), stfle(n). 
stal, stall, see stfle(n). 
stalworpe, stalw6rp,a^gr;, OM. stseh 
wert?e, WS. swiertJe; strong, stal- 
wart, 97, 29 ; stalewnrjje, 195, 29 ; 
stalwor^, 221, 16. 

stampyng, sb., based on stampe(n) ; 

stamping, pounding, 174, 23. 

Stan, eME. Hth. for ML stgn, sb., 
stone-, pL stanes, 3, 12. 


standard, sh., OF. estendard; Battle 
of the Standard, 5, 9. 
stande(n), stonda(n), stv., OE. 
standan (st^^ndan)-st6d (6) ; sta^id ; 
inf. stanndenn (O), 12, 14; stpnde, 
59, 24 ; stgnden, 234, \Z \ pr.i sg. 
stannt (O), 9, 3 -; stant, 14, i ,• 
stonte, 98, 19; pt. sg. stod, 21, 23; 
stod to, incline to, 51, 4; stode, 
89, II ; stood, 227, 20 ; pt.pl. stode, 
190, 25. lisrth. pt. sg. stud, 168, 
17. Sth. 3 sg. stent, 176, 20; 
pp. ystgnde, 336, 18. 
stane(n), adj., OE. stanen, infl. by 
Stan ? ; of stone ; in stanene,zw(c<?^?2, 
sepulchre') of stone, 196, 33. 
stane(n), w^., OE. st^nan, infl. by 
Stan; stone-, UTth. inf. Stan, 132, 
8 . 

stanestill, adj., OE-stan + still ; sto 7 ie- 
still, 1 6 1, 18. 

Stanewig, sb., Stanwick (Northamp- 
ton), 4, 24. 

Stanford, sh., Stamford (Lincoln- 
, shire), 6, 15. 

stannt, starch, see stande(n), stark. 
stare(n), wkv., OE. starian ; stare, 
glitter, shine ; pr. ppl. starinde, 80, 
15. Nth. pr. ppl., stareand, 163, 
13 - 

stark, starck, adj., OE. stare, stearc ; 

stark, strong, 75, 3 ; starck, 197, 3. 
stat, sb., OF. estat; state, condition-, 
stat9, 133, 21; slat, 154, 14; pi. 
states, 236, 2. 

statiel, sb., OE. sta?Jol ; foundation ; 
ds. statSele, ^6, 8. 

statut, sb., OF. statut ; statute, 236, 
26. 

stede, sh., OE. steda; steed-, pi. 

stedes, 48, 23, stedys, 107, 15, 
stfde, sb., OE. stede, IWS. styde; 
place, stead, 32, 30. Sth. stUde 
(< IWS. styde), 189, 21. 
stfdefsestliohe, adv.^ based on OE. 

stedefsest; steadfast, 226, ii. 
stfdefast, stedfast, adj., OE. stede- 
fsest; steadfast, 20, 21; stedlast, 
130, 14. eSth. stedefest, 226, 9. 
stfdefastnesse, OE. stedefsestnes, 
/.; steadfastness, i8, d. 



GLOSSARY 441 


stede(n), wJkv., ON. steSja, pp, 
staddr; sta^id^ place, press hard; 
pp. stad, 16S, 4; 173, 4. Cf. on- 
stede. 

stedfast, see stf defast, 
stefne, sd., OE. slefn,y^ ; voice^ sound, 
commotio 7 i, 183, 30. 
stei5e, see stige(rL), 
stfke(n), siv., OE. stecan-strec (5) ; 
stick, fast €71 itself; inf stgke, 122, 
16. 

stel, sb,, OM. stel, \VS. stiel; steel, 
20, 7. 

stflen, eME. stelen, stv., OE. stelan- 
stcel; steal; pt. sg. steel, 5, 24; stal, 
6, 29; pi. pL stall hi, 6, 8; pp. 
stglen, 22, II, 

stfm, sb., OE. steam ; siea^ii, vapor, 
83, 4 * 

stent, steorm, see st9nde(2i), storm. 
stSorman, sb., eSth. = Ml. sterman ; 
OE. steorman ; stee7'sman,pilot ; pi. 
steormen, 188, 8. 

steortnaket, adj., OE. steort + nacod ; 

quite naked, 194, 19. 

Stephne, later Stephen, sb., OF, 
Stephne ; Stephen ; Stephen of Blois 
(Blais), nephew of Henry I, and 
king from II 35 ” 64 » 2, 7. 
steppe(n), stv., OE. steppan (.steep- 
pan)-st6p (6) ; st^ ; pr. 3 sg. step- 
pety, 14, 5 ; pt. pi. stupen, 187, 27. 
sterfst, sterfp, see sterve(n). 
sterin, see stire(n). 

Sterne, sb., ON. stiarna, Dan. stjeine ; 

star; stemys, 145, 16. 
sterre, sb., OE. steorra; star; pi. 
sterres, 1, 16, 

stert, sb., OE. steort ; tail, 14, 5. 
sterte(n), wkv., ON- sterta; start; 

pt. sg. srerte, 36, 9. Cf. stirte(n). 
startle (n), based on ON. sterta, 

ME. sterten, ‘start’; rush, move 
swiftly, startle ; pr. ppl. stertlinde, 
5 »> 8 . 

$terve(n), stv., OE. steorfan-stearf 
(3) ; die, starve; inf. sterve, 245, 4 ; 
pr. 2 sg. bterfst, 216, it ; pr. ^ sg. 
sterf]), 215, i; pr. ppl. stervinde, 
218,33 ; mj^.^/.sterveb,2i6,io;//* 
pL stnrven, 3, 28 ; storven, 245, 27. 


stervinge, sb,, OE. *sterfiing, f.\ 
death, 217, 22. 

stevyn, stevin, sb., OE. stefn ; voice, 
constitniio 7 t, 135, 25 ; stevin, 140, 
26. 

steward, see stiward, 
sti, sb., OE. stig; path, way, 18, 14. 
stige(n), sti3e(n), stv., OE. stlgan- 
stag(h) (1); ascend, go up; eME. 
pt. sg. stall, II, 10. SEMI. pt. sg. 
steise, 68, 8, 

stile, sh., OE. stigel, f ; stile, 160, 8. 
stille, adj, adv., OE. stille ; still, 
quiet, 14, 9 ; stylle, 89, 25. 
stilnesse, sb., OE. stilnes/. ; quiet, 
2or, 25. 

stmge(n), stv., OE. stingan-stang 
(3); sting; pp. stdrigen, 61, 23. 
stmke(n), stv., OE. stincan-stanc 
(3) ; S7nell, simk ; Sth. pr. ppl. 
stiiikinde, 217, 25. 

stire(n), styrejn), wkv., OE. styrian ; 
stir; inf sterin, pr. z sg. 

stireS, 14, 9; pp. styred, 5, 28. 
Sth. iff. sturietn), 181, I ; pt. sg. 
stiirede, 183, 30. 

stirne, acf., OE. styme; stern, 43, 
31. Sth. stiime, 204, 17. 
stirte(n), wkv., ON. sterta ; start, 
leap ; pr. pi, stirte, 240, 9 ; pt. sg. 
stirte, 82, 10; stirt, 77, i ; pt. pi. 
stirten, 83, 12. 

stith, adj., OE. stW ; hardy, strotig, 
brave, 128, ii. 

stiward, later steward, sb., OE. 
stiweatd < stigweard ; steward, 27, 
31 ; steward, 115, 22. 
st6d(e), see stande(n). 
stok, sb., OE. stocc ; stock, stem, 235, 

24* 

stglen, see stfle(n). 

st§n, eME. Nth. stan, sb., OE. stan ; 

stofte, the groove, 15, 2 ; stfn^, 90, 3. 
st9nohi(en), wkv., OF, estanchier; 
stanch, came to cease ; inf. st^nchi, 
217, 26. 

st§nde(n), stood, see stande(n). 
stongen, see sting6(n). 
st^nstiHe, adj., OE. stan + stille; 

still as a stone, stonestill, 201, 29* 
stonte, see stande(ja). 



442 GLOSSARY 


stopen, see steppe(n). 
stoppe(rL), wkv., ON, stoppa; sfop\ 
pr, 5 sg. Steppe'S, 201, 10. 
atgre, sk, OF, estor; store, Uxasurc, 
88, 25, 

storke, sk, OE. store ; stork, 145, 5. 
storm, sb., OE. storm ; storm, tumult, 
19, 22. eSth. steorm, 196, 31. 
storven, see sterve(n). 
stgry, sb„ OF. estoire, estorie ; story, 
tale. III, 8. Ntlu //. stgris, 127, 
3, Sth. stgryes, 223, 10. 
stound, see stund. 
st^pe(n), see stupe(ii). 
stOTipe, stowrg, see stur. 
stout, stoutf, adj,, OF. estout ; stout, 
hardy, bold; stout^, 96, 18. 
stra, sb>, ON. stm, cogn, with OE. 

streaw, straw ; straw, 79, 5. 
strake, sk, Ntli. = M 1 . strgk ; OE. 
*strScj cf. stracian ; ; 173, 2. 

Cf, iStrggk. 

Strang, adj,^ Nth. = Ml., Sth. strgng ; 

OE. Strang, strgng; strong’, wk, 
strange, 126, 5. 

strange, sb., OF. estrange strange, 
224, 9. 

stran^elyoh, adv,, OF. estrange + 
Sth. lych; strangely, 225, 28. 
stranger, see strgng. 
strangle(n), wJh., OF. estrangler; 

strattgle ; pp, strangled, 84, 20. 
stratly, adv,, INth. = Ml. streitli; 

OF. estreit + ME. ll; straitly, 
seriously, 1 73, 4, 

straimger, sb,, OF. estranger ; 
stranger, 233, 16. 

strawe(n), wkv., OE. streawian, 
streawian; strew, scatter’, inf, 
strawen, 35, 16. 
stream, see strf m, 
streech©(n), »trechch©(n), wkv., 
OE. streccan-streahte ; stretch ; hif. 
strecchen, 196,4; j&n sr^.strechche]), 
221,^^ ;pt,sg, (Sth.) strehte, 181,8. 
streinpe(n) < streng]>e(n), wkv,, 
based on OE. streng?So ; strengthen ; 
pt, sg, streinjjed, 104, 28, 
streite, adv., OF. estreit; straitly, 
closely, narrowly, 61, 8. 
strfm, sb*, OE, stream ; stream, river. 


22, 32 ; pi., strfmis, 164, 5. Kt, 
stream, 216, 32; streme, 217, i. 
strencSe, see strengpe. 
streng, later string, sk, OE. streng ; 
siring; pi* strenges, 3,8; stringes, 
62, 10. 

strenge(n), wkv., OE. strengan ; 
strengthen, make siro 7 zg, establish ; 
pr. sbj. sg. strenge, 196, 12. 
strengere, see strgng. 
strengthe, strengpe, strenpe, sb,, 
OE. strengtJu, strengi 5 ,y^ ; strength, 
4, 22 ; strenpe, 149, 13 ; mid 

strengpe, by force, 204, 10 ; strenetJe, 
196, 12 ; stiengthe, 222, 5. 
str§one(n), wkv., dME. = Ml. stre- 
ne(n); OE. streonan; generate, 
beget; Sth. pp, istreoned, 19S, 
25. 

strete, sb., OM. stret, WS. street, ; 
street, 52,8. 

Stretford-atte-Bowe, Stretforpe- 
Bowe, sb., OM. Stretford, WS. 
Stratford ; Strat/ord-atte-Bow, 230, 
31; Stretforpe»Bowe, 232, 15. 
strey^t, adv., pp, < OE. streccan ; 

straight, straightway, 222, 22. 
strif, stryf, sb,, OF. estrif; strife, 33, 
24; striif, 126, 5; ds* str3?fe, 106, 
18. 

Striflin, sb., Stirling, 160, 27. 
string, see streng. 
strogele(n), wkv., origin tincertain, 
perhaps *strgkelen < OE, strac; 
struggle ; pr, 2 sg. strogelest, 244, i. 
strgnd, sb., OE. strand, strgnd; 
strand, shore; eME. ds, strgnde, 
186, 14. 

strgng, adj., OE. strang, strgng; 
strong, 16, 4; comp, strengere, 7, 
24; stranger; 219,15. eSth,y^. 
strgnge, 181, 19. 

strggk, sb., OE. *strac ; stroke, 228, 3. 
stroye(n), wkv., OF. destmire; dc'- 
troy; Nth, inf, stroy, 163, 12. 
strucyo, sk, Lat. struthio ; ostrich, 
stork, 145, 4. 

strhp6(n), wkv,, OE. (be)strypan ; 

strip; inf, striipeu, 194, 19, 
stryf, see strif. 

stud, stiide, see stande(n), st^de« 



GLOSSARY 443 


studelfast, adj\t OE, ^studolfsest, cf. 
OHG. studil, ON.stu^yill ; steadfast, 
196, 10. 

studie(3a)5 wkv., Sth.. s= Ml. stude(n') ; 
OE. ’“studian, cf. OHG. (ga)studian, 
OK. studu, sb., ^ prop * ; support, 
prop, stop; hnp. pL studgi je, 195, 
31* 

stumble(n), wkv., ON, stuniia, 
stumla; stu 7 nble\ pp. stumbilde, 
i6o, 8, 

stiind, stound, sb,, OE. stand, stand, 
f.\ moment, hour, time, 19,26; ds, 
stounde, 100, 2, 

stunde, adv,, OE. stand, sb, f ; at 
once, for th^ime, 35, 28. 
stupe(n), stdupe(n), wkv., OE. stu- 
pian; stoops mf stapen, 196, 4; 
pt sg. stQpede, 43, 27; stouped, 
3- _ 

stur, stoure, stowre, sb., OF. es- 
toiir ; strife, battle, Uimult ; pi, 
stures, 150, 8; stoure, 115, 29; 
stowre, 160, 9. 
stui'ie(3i), see stir0(n). 
sturn©, see stime. 
striimliche, ad^),, Sth, = Ml. stemli ; 
WS. stymHce,OM.stemlIce; sternly, 
fiercely, 187, 27. 
sturven, see sterve(n). 
stutte(n), wkv., OE. *stuttan, cf. 
MEG, stutten ; cease, stay, stop ; pt, 
sg, stutte, 195, 27. 

styff, styffe, adj., OE, stif ; strong, 
vdliant, stiff', styffe, 115, 29. 
stykke, sb,, Wth.. « Ml. sticche ; OE. 
stycce ; stick, piece, fragment, 142, 
10. 

stylle, see still©. 

stynte(n), wkv., OE. (a)styntan ; 
cease, stop, stint ; inf stynte, 106, 

i8. 

stynting, sb,<,pr, ppl,', cf. OE. 

styntan; stop, pause, 167, 19. 
styre(n), see stire(n). 
styrrynge, sb., OE. styryng,/. ; stir-* 
ring, ^notion, emotion, passion ; ill 
&tyri^ges, ezfil passions, 146, 13. 
stywes, sb, pL, OE. *steawe, cf. 
MLG, stOTiwe, ' fish pond’ ; brothels, 
5537, 9^ 


subject, j(5., OF. sujet, subject; sub- 
ject, vassal, 235, 23.^ 
subtile, adj., OF. soutil,soubtil; stih* 
iile\ subtiles (OF.//.), 232, 22. 
subtilly, adv., OF. soutil, subtil 4- 
ME. -ly ; carefully, subtilly, 243, 2. 
succession, sb,, OF. succession ; sm- 
cession, 221, 4. 
succour, see sucur. 
such, suohe, s^ swilc. 
sucur, succour, soobur, socuxe, 
s6c5re, sb., OF. sucurs ; succor, 
43, 4; socour, 102, 27; secure, 
12S, 20; socore, 157, 17; succour, 
168, 15. 

sucuri©(n), wkv,, Sth. — Ml. sa- 
cure(n) ; OF. succurre; succour \ 
pr, sbj , sg, %vsdi\T\, 2ii, 13; pt, sg, 
sucarede, 21 1, 13. 

suddanly, adv,, OF. sudein + If, 
suddenly, 172, 2, 

suden, soden, sudan, adj., OF. 
soudein; sudden \ soden, 124, 17; 
sadan< Sudan?, 143, i. 
suduwJe(n), wkv,, OF. suduire; sub- 
due', pt, pi, suduwede, 222, 31, 
su|te(n), OE. sw»tan; sweat', 
Nth. mf. su|t, 152, 2. 
sufErand, see sufllpe(n). 
sufiEcaunce, sb., OF. safraunce; suffer- 
ance, pertfiission, 236, I. 
suglpe(n), s6££re(n), s6fere(n), wkv., 
OF. suffrir; suffer', sufFre, 42, 
31 ; imp. sg, soffere, 123, 3 ; sofere, 
123, 26; pr.ppl. suFfrand, 104, 21 ; 
pt, sg. saffred, 97, 7 ; soffered, 122, 
6 ; sufferd, 137, 26 ; pp, soffrid, 55, 
25. Nth. suffer, 137, 2o;/r, 
3 sg. suffers, 130, 6. 
sii^^e, see 8eie(n;. 
su^^estion, sb,, OF. suggestion ; 

suggestion, 235, 13. 
suke(n), stv., OE. sucan, sugan, OM. 
sec ( WS. seac) ; such ; pr, 3 sg, 
sukeo, 19, 16. 

sul©(n) (sal, suld), see sohule(n). 
sulf, see self. 

sulliche, adv., OM. seldlxce, IWS. 

syllice ; strangely, 193, 6. 
sum, eom, adf,, OE. sum ; soine one 
4, 2$; pi, stune^ 3? r ; some, 60, 1 7^ 



GLOSSARY 


AAA 
THTT 

efitla. snmmes, 192, 19; ds. 
summe, 200, 17. 

sum, conj,, cf. Dan. som, OE. same, 
sgme; so, as, soever \ swasumm (O), 
so as, just as, 8, 17. 

sumdf 1, somdf 1, sb., OE. sum + dSl ; 
some deal, somewhat, 78, 21 ; som- 
dfl, 208, 24. 

sumer, sb,, OE. sumor ; summer, fair 
weather, as opposed to winter or 
foul weather, 19, 23. 
aumkin,/r;?., OE. sum + cynn ; some 
kind of \ JSrth.//. sumkins, 130,1. 
summe, summes, see sum. 
sumtyde, adv,, OE. sum + tid, ; 

sometimes, 158, i. 

sumwhat, sumwat, pm., OE. sum + 
hw^et; somexvhat, 92, 27 ; sumwat, 
53, 27. K'th. sumquat, 130, 22. 

sun, suneken, see sune, sinke(n). 

sund, adj,, OE. gesund(sund) ; sound, 
healthy, 15, 30. 

Sunday, see Sunnendai. 
sEnden, see be(n). 
sundrx, adj., OE. syndrig, infl. by 
sunder; sundry, separate, 31, 2. 
sundrie(n), wkv., Sth. = Ml. sun- 
dre(n) ; OE, sundrian ; sunder, 
separate ; pt. sg. sundrede, 201, 21 ; 
pp, isundret, 195, 24. 

sune, sone, sb., OE. sunu ; so7t, 2,1; 
sone, 46, I ; pi. sunes, 24, 30; 
(SEMI.), sunen^ 25, 15. ITtk. sun, 
129, 6 \^pl. sonnys, 174, 19. 

sunne, sonne, s6n(e), sun, sb., OE. 
sunne; sun, 1, 15; sonne, 89, 4. 
Nth. sone, 150, 18; son, 148, 6; 
sun, 150, 19. 

sunnebfm, sb., OE, sunnebeam ; 

sunbeam, 83, 5 ; sounebfm, 228, 12. 
siinnen, see sinne. 

Sunnendaei, Sunday, sb., OE. 
sunnandsBg; Sunday; Sunnendaei, 
7, 31 ; Sonendaj^ 7^? 9 5 Sunday, 
116, 23. 

superfluytee, sb. OF. snperfluite ; 

superfluity, excess, 237, 15. 
stippgse(n), wkv., OF. supposer;^^ 
suppose; pr. pi. supple, 234, 29. 
sustayn6(n), wkv., OF. snstenir, ind, 
by ending teine ; sustain ; 


pi. sustajmede, 146, 27. Sth. inf. 
susteini, 304, 19; susteyne, 220, ii, 
susteini, susteyne, see sustayne(n). 
sustenance, sustenaunce, sb., OF. 
soustenance; sustenance, 146, 27; 
sustenaunce, 234, 28. 
suster, sb., OE. sweoster, swuster; 
later displaced by ON. syster ; 
sister, 7, 2 ; ^s. suster, iSo, 28 ; pi. 
sustren, 196, 21. Cf. sister. 
susteyne(n), see sustaine(n). 
suteli(n), wkv., OE. sweotillian, swii- 
telian; beco^ne manifest, appear; 
inf. sutelin,_i94, 27. 
suU, suth, south, adv., OE. 

south, 16, 26; suth, 78, 5 ; south, 
* 55»2I. 

suth, see soj). 

suthfast, adj., INth. = Ml. s5J>fast ; 

OE. sotSfaest ; truthful, 141, 12. 
suthly, adv., Nth. = Ml. sothly; 

OE. so?51ice; truly, 174, 14. 
su1J8e(n), suj>the, suth, see si]?])en. 
swa, sa, adv., eME. Nth. for Ml. 
swo (sp) ; OE. swa ; so, also, yet, 
I, 3; 128, 13; sa, 151, 29. Cf. 
swp. 

Swanborow, sb., Swanborow, 77, 
14. 

swart, adj., OE. sweart ; dark, swart, 
182, 7. 

sweche, see swilc. 
swein, sb., ON. svein, cogn. with 
OE. swan ; swain, servant ; sweyn, 
75? 5 ; swein, 185, 9 ; pi. sweines, 
186, 24. 

swelle(n), stv., OE, swellan-swsel 
(3); swell; inf swelle, 49, 13. 
swenche(n), swenke(n), swyn- 
ke(n), wkv., OE. swencan fatigue, 
torment, afflict ; pt. pi. swencten, 2, 
32. 

sweord, see swerd, 
sweore, sb., OE. sweora ; neck, 1 80, 
24. 

swep (swfp), sb.; OE. *swaep(?); 

scope, meaning, 22, 22. 
swerd, sb., OE. sweord ; sword, 41, 
13 ; eME. sweord, 181, 17 ; ds. 
swiorde, 182, 6; pi. sweord, 189, 

, 28. eSth, ds. swerde, 327^ 2,5., 



GLOSSARY 


445 


swfre, OE. swim, sweora; nec^, 
p. 267. 

swfre(n), sizu, OE. swerian-swor(6) ; 
szuear\ pr. shj, sg, s\v|re, 76, 23; 
pt. sg. swor, 6, 3 ; pL swore, 90, 
13; p^. bworen, 2, 29 ; sworn, 57, 
20. irth./A'. 3 sg, swfris, 145, 27. 
Sth. V?/. swerien (eSth.), 193, 19: 
pr. sdj, p/„ swgrien, 226, ii; pp, 
isw9re, 204, 16; iswgrene, 226, 24. 
sw|rie(n), see swere(n). 
swfrynge, sb,^ OE. *swerung ; swear- 
ing, 145, 28. 

swete, adj,, adv,, OE. swete ; sweet, 
33, 27 ; swetteste, witli shortening, 
I9> lo- 

swettnes, sb,, OE. swetnes, f,, by 
shortening ; sweetness, 145, i. 
sweven, sb., OE. swefen ; sleep, 
dream ; eME. ds. swevene, 182, 24. 
swevenyng, sb.\ extension of OE. 

swefen ; dreaming, 93, 18. 
sweyn, see swein. 

swiodom, sb,, OE. swiedom; deceit, 
fraud, 1, 6, 
s‘wice(ii), see swike(n). 
swiohe, see swilo. 

swik, sb,, OE. swic, n, deception’, 
ds, swike, 19, 14. 

swike, sb., OE. swica; traitor, de- 
ceiver', pL swikes, 2, 12. 
swikedom, sb,, OE. swiedom ; treach- 
ery', ds. swikedome, 1S3, 5. 
swikelkfde, sb,, OE. *swicolhSd; 
deception, 203, 22. 

swike(n), siv,, OE. swican-swac (i) ; 
deceive, fail, cease, desist from*, 
imp, sg, swic, i8, II ; pt, ph 
swyken, 5, 26 ; fp, pL swikene, 179, 
14. 

swilc, swich, syck, suck, sock, adj. 
{adv, conj,), OM. swilc, IWS. swylc ; 
such, so, 1, 15; swillc (O), 10, 
6; swilch, 178, 24; syche, 125, 29; 
pL swilce, 4, 7 ; swilke, 25, 20 ; 
sweeke, 59, 19; soche, 114, 9; wh, 
swicke, 39, 12; snche, 36, 20. 
3 Srtlu swilk, I28y 27; sic, 172, 8. 
Stk. such, 203, 23, ’K.t.pL zuyche, 
315, 33 * 

swSu, sw^, sb..^ OE. swin, n . ; suoine, 


hog, 86, 17; swyn, 53, 4. Stk.^. 
swiines, iSo, 23. 

swine, sb,, OE. swine ; labor, trouble, 
archaic swink, 4, 1 1 ; swinne (O), 
9, 26. Stk. swinches, 178, 8. 
swinek, see swine. 
swinde(n), adv., OE. swindan (swm- 
dan)-swand (swpnd) (3) ; waste 
azvay, vanish, be of no avail ; inf 
swlnden, 178, l. 
swinno, see swine, 
swire, sb., OE. swira (sweora), ON. 

sviri ; neck, 44, 33. 
switke, swylSe, adv,, OE. swr^e ; 
very, strongly, greatly, quickly, i, 
8. Stk. swuS’e, 180, 23. 
swi 5 e(n), stv., ON. swtSa, ME. swl- 
2 ye(n)-s\vat 5 (i) ; singe, burn \ pr, 3 
sg. swIiSe??, 15, 25. 

swiwike, sb,, OE. *swTgwiocu ; week 
of silence, holy-zoeek, 200, 3, 

SW9 (swo), S9 (so), adv,, OE. swa 
(*sa), Dan. saa; so^ 15, 3; 59, 14, 
3. Kt. zug, 216, 2. 
swolke(n), stv., OE. swelgan (sweol*' 
gan)-swealh (3) ; swedlow', inf, 
bwolhen, 196, 13. 

sw6r(e), swore(n), sworn, see 
swfre(n). 

swiin, swulSe, see swin, sw 3 l 5 e. 
swyke(n), see swike (n), 
swyle(n), wkv., OE. swilian ; wash, 
swill ; inf, swyle, 96, 24. 
swylke, see swilc. 
swyn, see swin. 

swynke(n), stv., OE. swincan-swanc 
(3); labor, zvork’, inf. swynke, 
245 > 13. Stk. pp, iswunken, 202, 
18. 

8f, sb,, OE, sige; victory, 193, li. 
syb, syoke, see sib, swilc. 
syourly, sye, see sikerlike, sS(n). 
syde, see side. 

sygke(n), wkv., OE. sican, *sigan?; 

J sygked, 109, 10. 

sygkyng, sb. <pr. ppU*, OE. sican; 
sighing, 92, I. 

sygne, sb., OF. seigne, signe; sign, 
93 r 9 - 

sy^t, see sikt. 

sykemes, sb., ON, ?, ct Dan. sikker, 



GLOSSARY 


446 


OFris. siker (Lat. seomis) + ME. 
-nes ; security^ 94, 26. 
syknes, sb,, OK seocness, f . ; sick- 
ness, 90, 22. 
sylver(re), see silver. 

Symeon, sb,, Lai. Simeon ; Simeon, 
26, 4. 

symple, adj., OF. simple; shitple, 
235 ) 

syn, syne (syns), see si151>en, sinne. 
syngfr, syrmfr, see sm5fre. 
syngfre, sb,, OE, *sing|re; singer, 
237) 23. 

synne, syn^e, see sinne. 
synnfr, see sin^fre. 
syiiiie(n), sinne(n), wkv,, OE. syn- 
gian; sm\ pp. synned, 102, 3 
Sth. (SEMI,)) sinlgeden, 26, 


(syr), see sire. 

syster, syst, see sister, se(n). 
sytli (sythe), sythen, see sippen. 
sytte(n), see sitte(n). 
syxte, see sexte. 


T. 

t’, see^Q, 

ta, taak, see take(n). 

tabell, sb., OF, table ; table, 126, 14. 

tabernacle, sb., OF. tabernacle ; 

tabernacle, dwelling place, 104, 5. 
taotLte, see tfche(n). 
taonen, wkv., eMB. USTth. for Ml. 
tgkne(n); OE. *tacnian; show, 
betoken, 12, 31. 
tsecen, see tak6(n). 
t8eob.e(n), see tfche(ii). 
tselen ss tfle(n), wkv., OE. tSbn ; 
blame, curse ; pr. 3 sg. t0ele])]> (O), 
9 ) 25. 

tser, tssronne, see per, peron. 
tagte, see tfo]ie(n). 
tail, sb., OE. taegel, tsegl ; tail, 
retinue, 63, 16; taile, 207, ri. 
take(n), eME. taken, stv., ON. taka- 
tok (6); take, seize, begin, touch; 
ir^. tsecen (eME.), 5, ii ; take, 55, 
8 ; pr. 3 sg. takers, 16, 12; imp, 
pL taak, 242, 14 ; pt. sg. t 5 c^ 2, 15 ; 
tokf, 67, 10 ; toe tg, succeed to, 7, 


9; pt. pi. t5can (eME.), 2, 14; 
token, 26, 8; toke, 89, 14; pp. 
takenn (O), 8, 16 ; take, 58, 18. 
mh. inf. ta, 166, 21 ; pr. 3 sg. 
tas, 127, 25 ; takes, 143, 26 ; pr.pL 
tak we, 134, 27 ; pt. sg. ttik (INlh.), 
167, 31 ; tane, 136, 15 ; takin, 
137, 5. eSth. inf. taken on, act, 
do, take on, 185, 12; pt. sg. tok, 
touch Q), 211, 7; pp. ytake, 219, 9. 
takening, see t&kning. 
takenn, see take(n). 
taker, sb., based on ME. taken <ON. 

taka; taker, protector, 103, 24. 
takning, takening, sb,, Ntli. = Ml. 
tgkeninge ; OE. taenung,/. ; tokeft, 
sign, tokening, 148, 5 ; takening, 

L53 j 7- , , . s . 

takyng, sb., based on take(n) ; seizure, 

taking, 320, 3. 

tald, see telle(n). 

tale, sb., OE. talu ; tale, story, number, 
21, I ; at 9 tale, in a case, 57, 19* 

Tambre, sb., OE. Tamar; Tamar; 

//j*. Tambxe, 189, 20. See note, 
tame, adj., OE. tarn, ON. tamr; tame, 
159) 12. 

tane, see take(n). 

tarette, sb., OF. teride; transport 
vessel; pi. tarettes, 164, 12. 
tar|:e, sb,, OF. targe, cogn. with OE. 
targe ; targe, shield ; pi. targes, 
207, 31. 

tarie(n), targie(n) , , OM. tei gan, 

WS. tiergan; delay, tairy; inftzxl^, 
243, 3; targi, 2:4, 12. 
tas, see take(n). 
tatt, see pat. 

tangtest, tau^test, see tfehe(n). 
taverne, sb., OF. taverne; tavern; 

pU tavemes, 120, 17. 
taverner, sb., OF. tavemier; inn- 
keeper, 239, 23. 

tawne(n), wkv., OM. *0etea\vnian, 
later *0eteawnian by shortening, 
eM^E. *atawnen *tawnen; cf. O. 
awwnen, implying OM. eawnian, 
eawnian ; show, point out ; inf 
tawnen, 23, 30. 

tayled, adj., based on OE. taegl 
* tail ’ ; tailed, having a tail, 60, 9. 



GLOSSARY 


447 


Taylefer, st., OF. Tailefer ; Tail- 
lefer, 207, 25. 
te, te, see to, pe or pii. 
tfclie(n\ %vkv.^ OIl. tajcnn, toi'cean- 
t&hte (talite) ; ieach ; hif, tfche, 50, 
27; pr. 3 sg, tfchep, 124, 10; 
t^che])])(0), 10, 4; pr. shj. sg. 
tgche, 198, 30; pt. sg. tagte, 29, 
12; pf. 2 sg. laugtest, 49, 24 ; 
tau5tist, 55, 1 1, ITth. pt. sg. wk. 
Ifchid, 1 36, 1 3. Sth. pi. sg. tachte, 
213, 20; pp. ylaii5t, 66, 27. Kt. 
pr.j sg. tekp, 216, 15, 
tfoligr, tf Cher, sk., based on tf che(n) ; 
teacher.^ 141, ii, 

iechinge,j< 5 .,E:t. =Ml.t|chinge; OE. 

tfficung,/,; teaching, 213, i. 
teday, tee (te5), see today, te(n). 
te^^, see pe5. 

tegsedere, -gidre, see togadere. 
taken, adv. prep., OM. t 5 -ecan, WS. 
to-eacan ; in addition, besides ; 
tekenn (O), 9, 5. 
tekp, see tfche(n). 
tel, teld, see telle(n), 
tele, sb., OE. getael ('^'getel), perhaps 
til ? cf. telynge ; number, rime, 
fortune-telling iy), 125, 31. 
telle(n), wkv., OE. tellan~OM. talde 
(WS. tealde); tell, number, account', 
inf. lellen, 3, 20; lellenn (O), 9, 
14; telle, 107, 26 ; pr. 3 sg. relp, 
2 1 1, 10; pr. sbj. sg. telle, 45, 16 ; 
imp, sg. tel, 21, 20 j telle, 66, 17; 
pt. sg. tglde, 23, 22 ; pi. pi. tglden, 
26, 29; pp. t99ld, 239, 9, ITth. 
inf. tell, 126, 12; pr. 2 sg. tels, 
136, 3 telles, 125, 6 ; pt. 

sg. wk. teld, 136, 14 ; pp. tM, 130, 
27; pp. wk. telld, 154, 14. Sth. 
pr. pi. tellep, 210, 15 ; //. pi. itSlde 
(eME.), 185, 28; itgld, 36, 15. 
telynge, ^< 5 ., OE. tilung, teolnng,/. ; 
sorcery f 125, 23. 

t§me(n), wJh., OM. teman (WS. He- 
man) ; lead, bring forth, instruct ; 
inf. temen, 179, 19; teme, 50, 27. 
tempeste, sb., OF. tempeste; tempest^ 
21X, I. 

temple, sb.^ OF. temple ; temple, 72, 
29, 


temptacioun, sb., AN. tenlatiun, 
modified; iemptatio7i, trial, 103, 29. 
te(n), stv., OE. teon-OM. leh (\VS. 
teah) (2); d7'aw, lead, go, mo?mt; 
i7if. tee, 232, 13 ; /r. 3 sg. teff, 15, 
19 ; pt. sg. te5 < te 5 , 4I: ii- Sth. 
inf. teon (eSth.), 1S6, 32; pt.pl. 
tuhen, 192, 25. 

ten, adj,, OM. ten, WS. Hen ; tcji, 1 7, 4* 
ten, tend (tende), see tene, tenpe. 
tende(n), wkv., OE. tendan, tendan; 

khidle ; pt. pi. tenden, 43, 2. 
tendirly, adv., OF. tendre -f- ly ; 

lovmgly, tenderly, 173, 20, 
tene, ten, sb., OE. teona; vexation, 
injury/, 87, 14. Nth. tene, 14^, 20 ; 
ten, 148, 8. eSth. teone, 194, 26- 
tenserle, sb., OF. *tenserie, Lat. 
tensarium; special impost, tribute, 
3> 24. 

tente, tent, sb. , OF. entente ; inien- 
iion, care, heed, 99, 17. 
tente(n), wkv., OF, tendre \ attend ; 

Nth. inf. tent, 134, 13. 
tenpe, adj., OM. tegotJa (WS. teo- 
go^a), modified by ten; tenth, 62, 
20. Nth. tende, 152, ii; tend, 
147, 26. 

Teodbald, sb., OF. Theodbald ; 

Theobald, 5, 1 7. 
teon, teone, see te(n), t§ne. 
teonne, see panne, 
tfr, sb., OE. tear; tear\ pi. tgres, 28, 
32. Kt. tyear, 218, 21. 
t|r, t^efter, see pe, per, perafter. 
tfre(n), wkv., OE. ’•'teorian, tirwan ; 

cover with tar-, inf. tgre, 86, 23. 
terme, sb., OF. terme ; term, period, 

64. 25- 

testament, sb., OF. testament ; testa- 
ment, conwiaful, 103, 9 ; part of the 
Bible, 130, 6. 
tet, toth, see pat, top. 
teythe, sb., OM, tegotSa (W^S. teo- 
goSa); tenth, tithe, 1^5, 10. 
teythe(n), wkv., OM. tegotSian, WS. 
teogotyian ; tithe ; inf. teythe, 1 25, 
12. 

teythynge, sb., OM. tego&ung, f\ 
tithing, 125, 14. 
tham(e), thayin(e), see pey 



448 


GLOSSARY 


tliare, see per. 

that (thatt), the, see pat, pe. 
theef, thef, see pef. 
thei, theim, them, see pey. 
then, siv., 0 £. tJeon-OM. 'Seh (WS. 
Seah) (2) ; prosper^ inf. the, 107, 
4 * 

ther and compounds, see per. 
thepen,^^^^ tJetSen. 
theves, thevis, thew, see pef, ?Sew. 
thider, thine, see pider, pinche(n). 
thise, see pis. 

thg, thoro, thorow, see pat, purh. 
thossand, see pusand. 
thoughte, thourgh, see pinche(n), 
pTirh. 

tho-w(e), see poh. 

thrall, adv.y OE. 01^1 + lice; tyran- 
nically^ 132, j8. 

thrang, sb.^ Nth. = Ml.prgng, thrgng; 
OE. geSrang; crowd, throng\ in 
thrang, in durance^ 174, 7. 
thrang, see pringe(n). 
thraw, sb.^ ITth. «= Ml. throw; OE. 

prah,/!; timc^ season, 167, 13. 
thre, see pre. 

thrfte(n), thrette(n), wJh., OE. 
©reatan; threaten \ 3 ^th. pr. 3 sg. 
thretes, 161, 17; //. p/. thrette, 132, 
18. 

thrfting, sh., OE. tJreatung ; thi'eaten- 
ing, menace, 161, 16. 
thrette(n), see thrfte(n), 
thrid, see pridde. 

thr 5 nge(n), stv., OE. ^yringan-^irang 
(Srong) (3); press, throng \ pU sg. 
thrang, 141, 21. 

thritte, thrive(n), see pritti, 
prive(n). 
thr§ne, see trgne. 
throte, see dr^te. 
throu, see porh. 

thrum, sb., OAng. cf. WS. 

?Jrym ; power, multitude ; al on a 
thrum, all in a body, with a rush, 
141, 21. 

thurgh, thurghe, see purh. 
thyfte, sb., OE. tSeoftJ, possibly ON. 

147,11. 

thynkande, thyiiketh, see pin- 
ohe(n), pinke(n)* 


thynkande, see penehe(n), pen- 
ke(n). 

thynkyngejJ^., based on OE. pencan; 

thinking, 146, 17. 
thyrde, thys, see pridde, pis. 
tide, sb., OE. tid, /. ; time, season, 
hour; MnE. tide; tyde, 108, i ; pi. 
tides, 212, 29. eSth, ds. tiden, 
181, I. 

tide(n), wkv., OE. tidan ; happen, 
betide ; pp. tide, 159, 24. 
tidende, see ti'Sende. 
tidi, adj., extension of OE. tid 01 
*tidig ?; fit, suitable, neat ; wel tidi, 
well grown, 23, 9. 

tiding, sb., OE. tidung, f. ; message, 
news, tidings, 65, 24. 
til(l), tyl, tylle, prep, conj., ONth., 
possibly Merc. (?), til ; till, to, 
until, 2, 26 ; tyl, 98, 32 ; tyll§, 107, 
23; till, as long as, 171, 31, 
tile(n), wkv., OE. tilian; obtain, 
procure, cultivate, till, aid; inf, 
tilen, 16, 5; tylle, 91, 30; pt. sg, 
tdede, 4, 6 ; pp. tiled, 3, 27. 
tille(n), wku., OE. tyllan; draw, 
entice ; pp. tilled, 78, 9. 
til'Se, sb., OE. tilt>, time, f. ; labor, 
178, I. 

tilward, adv. liTth. for Ml. toward; 
OE. til + weaid ; toward, 148, 20. 

tim, see time. 

timbre(n), timbrin, wkv., OE. tim- 
brian ; build, 7 Hake, do ; inf. tim- 
brin, 194, 26. Sth. pp. itimbbred, 
184, 23. 

time, tyme, sb., OE. tima; time, 2, 
4 ; tyme, 52, 30. ITth. tim, 126, 10. 
time(n), tiniie(n), wkv.^ OE, getz- 
mian ; happen, befall, prosper ; inf. 
timen, 31, 9. Sth. pp. itimed, 
1S8, 15. 

tin, tine, see pin. 

tintreow, sb., OE. tintreg ; torment, 

tiraunt, sb., OF. tirant ; tyrant, 221, 
12. 

tire(n), wkv., OE.tirian ; vex, strive; 
inf. tire, 44, 34. 

tirne(n), wkv., OE. tyman; turn; 
pt. pi. timeden, 83, 16. 



GLossAnr 


449 


tis(s), see }>is. 

tite, adz),j ON. litt, netfL of ti'Sr, ; 
quickly^ 137, aS. 

tipende, tipand, tidende, titSinge, 
sb.^ ON. tTi 5 indi ; message, tidings ; 
tijjennde (O), 11, 4; tiding, 31, 6. 
Nth. tl}>and, 154, 30. Sth. ti- 
dende, 185, 14 ; tiding, 200, 14. 
Cf. tidinge. 

Tiwosni^ht, sh., OE. Tlwesniht; 

Ti4ei>day night, 2 2 8, 27. 
tg, see pe, pat, 911. 
to, te, t*, prep, adv., OE. to ; to, for, 
I, I ; t’ (O), 9, 10; te, 195, 13; to 
{adv,^ toward, 51, 15; to ‘ 5 at, 
tintil, 3, 9. 

to, adv,, OE. to ; too, also, 176, ii. 
to, see two. 

t6b|re(n), siv,, OE. toberan-bsc-r (4) ; 
separate, eause trouble \ pi, j^.lSbar, 
24, 18, 

tobrast, see t6br0ste(n). 
t6brgke(iL), siv,, OE. tobrecan-brtec 
(4) ; break asztndcr; pr, pi, to- 
breken (eME.), 189, 30; pt, sg. 
tobrac, 182, i ; pp, tobroke, ao8, 16, 
t6breste(n), OE. toberstan-bserst 
(3); burst asunder; pp. tobrast, 

58. 17- 

tobroke, see t6brfke(n). 
too, toean, see take(rL). 
todsei, see today, 
tods&len, see t6dfle(n). 
today, sL, OE. todseg ; today, 77, 29- 
eMB. tSdsei, 184, 24; tddai, 210, 
2 1 . Kt. teday, 2 1 1 , 10. 
tfde, sb,, OE. tadige, tadie; toad, 
<5i, 2Q, 

tdd|le(3a),W/^.,OE. tSdselan; divide, 
distribute, scatter; pt. sg. todJBlde 
(eME.), 7,. 10 j todfld, 2, 20; 10- 
d|lde, 187, 5 ; pp, todfled, 6, 23. 
Kt. pr. 3 sg, tSdelp, 216, 32 ; pr, 
sbj. pi. todele we, 216, 16 j imp.sg. 
t&el, 217, 9. 

tddSbLnge, sb. , E!t. ML tdd|linge ; 
based on Kt. t5d€len; separation, 
,2I($, 14. 

todiatihfe, sh., based on OE. 

, dihtati4 dividing, separation, 216, 
33 ‘ 


t6dra5e(n), siv., OE. todragan-droh 
(6) ; draw asunder, destroy; eME. 
inf, t6dra5e, 184, 27 ; pt. sg, todroh, 
iSi, 23. 

tofgre, adv. prep,, OE.toforan; before, 
102, 3. Sth. tov^re, 21S, 19. 
tofgremseid, adj., OE. toforan + Sth. 
pp. iseid ; aforesaid, beforesaid; pi, 
226, 8. 

togadere, -geodere, -g0der©,-gidere, 
adv., OE. to gsedere ; together, 36, 
14; togcedere, 2, 16 ; togedere, 37, 
25 ; togider, 30, 33 ; togidre, 33, 
21 ; tegidre, 59, 5. Nth. togedir, 
135, II ; logydre, 334, 9. 
togfisnes, togeanes, see togenes. 
togedere, see togadere. 
togederes, togedres, adv,, OE. lo- 
gjcdere ; together, 192, 9; togedres, 
228, 2. 

togenes, togsenes, prep, adv., OE. 
togegnes ; against, opposite ; to- 
gSnes (eME.), 5, 6, Sth. togfanes 
(eSth.), 178, 20; tojeines, 189, 18. 
Kt. tSyenes, 213, 6. 
togge(n), t6gge(n)?, wkv,, origin 
uncertain, cf. MDn. tocken ; draw, 
pull, tug; pp, togged, 63, i. 
togider (-re), togydre. see togadere. 
t6hewe(n), stv., OE. toheawan-heow 
(R) ; hew in pieces ; eME. pp. to- 
haiiwen, 190, 13. 
token, see take(n). 
t9fc©nynge, sb., OE. tacnung, f.; 

sign, token, tokening, no, ii. 
t9ld, tglden, see telle(n). 
tolo « tol, sb., OE. t61 ; tool, p. 282. 
tolle(n), wkv,, cL OE. tyllan, ‘ draw,’ 
perhaps ON. tolla, * cleave * ; draw, 
attract ; MnE. tull ; pr. 3 sg, toilet?, 
20, 17. 

toller e, sh,, OE. tollere j toU collector, 
88, 18. 

toloken, see tol'u.ke(n)., 

Tolous, MS. Tolloua, TulloliS, sh , 
OF. Tolous, Tulons ; Toulouse, 
106, 7. 

tdliike(n), stv,, OE. tblucan4§ac (2 ) ; 
tear asunder; inf. toluken, 193, 
21; pt. pL t61uken> 197, 6; pp. 
toloken, 193^ 25. 



GLOSSARY 


tomer^e, tomar^en, see tomorwen. 
tombestfre, 5*3., OE. tumbestgre ; 

femcUe dancer y 237, 21. 
tomorwen, tomoruwe, tomoru, sb.y 
OE. tomcTTgen; tomorrow y 81, 5; 
tomoru-we, 49, 8; tomom, 128, 6. 
eSth. tomarsen, 184, 31 ; t 5 ma£r 5 e, 
1S4, 

tgn, tong (tonge), see §n, tungo. 
tordcbt, toniht, tonight, tonyght, 
shy OM. to ngeht, WS. niht; tonight y 
81, 8 ; toniht, 181, 10 ; tonight, 
239, II. 

tggld, see telle(n). 
top, sb,y OE. topp ; topy tuft of hair, 
heady 63, 16. 

torohe, j 3 ., OF. torche ; torchy i iS, 13. 
t6rende(n), wk7),y OE. *torendan, cf. 
OFris. torencia; rend or tear 
asunder; pt, pL torente, 240, 1 3 ; 
pp. torent, 6i, 24. 

torment, sb., OF. torment ; torment; 

pL tormens, 217, 13. 
torn, 5*3., OF. turn; tumy advantage y 

243, 19 - 

tornd, see tiirne(n). 

Tomeie, sb., OE. Domeg ; Thorney 
(Cambridgeshire), 8, 9. 
t6pn©ment,5-3., OF. toraoiement, AN. 

tomeiement ; tournement, 61, 20. 
tosamen, adv, , OE. to + ON. samen ; 
together y 23, 13. 

t6sn|de(n), wh),y OE. tosn^dan, 
*snse?yan ? ; cut in two ; pt, sg. to- 
snaSde (for tosnadde ?), 182, 6. 
tosomne, adv., OE. tosamne(s9mne) ; 
together, 189, 31. 

t6sprfde(n), wkv,, OE. tospradan; 
spread apart or about, scatter ; pp, 
tosprad, 208, 9. 

t6tfre(n), stv,, OE. toteran -tser (4 ) ; 
tear to pieces; inf totfren, 22, 25 ; 
pr, pU lotfre, 237, 18. eSth. to- 
teoren, 193, 21. 

top, sb.y OE. to'S ; tooth ; pL te?y, 50, 
21 ; teth, 122, 16. 
t^ere, toper, tothire, see oper. 
ton, see pu. 

toumbe, sb,, OF. tumbe, tombe; 
Jomby 11^ 3- 

touii(e), tour, see tun, tur. 


toume, see turne(n). 
touward, see toward. 
t6vleote(n), stv,, OE. tofleotan-fleat 
(2) ; float in different directions, be 
dispersed; eSth.fw/I tovleoten, 201, 
14. 

tovpre, see tofpre. 
towaille, sb., OF. touaille; towel, 
39 » 21 

toward, adj. prep,, OE. toweard; 

towards, 66, 7 ; touward, 188, 5. 
t6wraste(n), wkv,, OE. towrmstan ; 
tear or wrest asunder; pt, pi, to- 
wraste, 60, 17. 

t6wrenche(n), tt/^.,OE.*to'WTencan ; 

tear apart; tSwrenche, 58, 10. 
towrgng, adj, , OE. to + ON. vrangr ? ; 

twisted, awry, 15, 13. 
toySnes, see togenes. 
toyle(n), wkv,, OF. toiller; pull 
about, harass ; pp, toyled, 60, 8. 
traist, adj,, ON. *treystr, cf. treysta, 
V, ; strong, confident ; super I, traistest , 
128, 9. 

traistli, adv,, based on traist; con- 
fidently, 134, 18. 

traitor, traytor, traitour, sb., NF. 
traitre, acc, traitor (OF. traitur) ; 
traitor; traytor, traitor, 

223, 19; pi, traitours, 57, 19; 
traytours, 57, i6. 

translate(u), wkv., OF. translator; 
transfer, translate; pp, translate, 
133, 22. 

trappe, sb,, OE. trseppe, treppe ; trap; 

pi, trappes, 103, 25. 
trass, sb.y OF. trace; track, trace, 
168, 13. 

traste(n), wkv,, INth. » MI. trais- 
te(n); ON. treysta; trust, rely 
upm; INth. inf. tr^t, 171, 29. 
travail, sb., OF. travail ; labor, 
travail, trouble, 103, ii. Nth. 
traveil, 129, 7; travalg (INth.), 
167, 24. 

travaile(n), travale(n), wkv,, OF. 
travailer; travail, labor, travel; 
pt, pi, travailleden, 235, 9 ; pp, 
itravailed, 212, 19. Nth. pr. pl^ 
travalis, i74» 3i travaland, 

173, 31. 



GLOSSARY 451 


travale, traveil, see travail, 
trayson, see trf son. 
traytor, traytonr, see traitor, 
tre, s^, OE. treo ; loo, iS. 
trfchery, trecherie; treachery^ 

78, 34. 

tred, sh., OE. tredd ; tread, track, 
62, 4, 

trf de(n), stv, , OE. tredan-trsed (5) ; 
tread ; inf, tredenn (O), 9, 23 ; pt. 
pi. trgde, 62, 3 ; pp, troden, 240, 16. 
treothe, treowthe, see treuthe. 
treowe, see trewe. 
treowlich, adf, eSth. = Ml. treuli; 
OE. treowlic ; truly, sincerely, 192, 
14. 

trfson, trfsun, trayson, sb., OF. 
traison, AN. traisunj treason, i, 
19; trayson, 51, 13. 
trfsor, trfsur, eME. tresor, sb., NF. 
tresor, OF. tresnr ; treasure ; tresor 
(eME.), 2, 20 ; tigsor, 242, 16. 
trespas, sb^, OF. trespas; trespass, 
93, 4. 

trespasse(n), lukv., OF. trespasser; 
trespass] pr. sbj, s^» trespasse, 241, 
3 2. 

trenthe^ treuthe, sb., OE, treowSe ; 
truth, faith, troth, 2, 29 ; trew'&e, 
promise, 30, 16 ; treu]?e, 204, 11 ; 
pi. tieothes, 2, 30. 
treuthfde, -ede, sb., OAng. treowtJ- 
IiKd,/;,* truth, fidelity, 129, 15. 
trewe, trew, adj., OE. treowe ; true, 
18, 22 ; ^tiltless, 109, 23 ; superl. 
trewest, 76, 9. 

treweEfde, sb., OE. treow + h|de; 
faithfulness, especially religious 
faith, 205, 3. 

trewely, adv., OE. tieowHce ; truly, 
indeed, 242, 25. 

trewe(n), OE. treowian ; trust, 
believe] pr. 3 sg. ttewefS, 21, 1. 
Cf. trowe(n). 

trewnesse, sb., OE. trewness, ; 

trust, confidence, 37, 30. 
trewde, tx^wthe, see treutlie, 
tribniacioun, sb., AN. tribulatiun; 

tribulation, 104, 11. 
tricherie, sb., OF. tricherie, triquerie ; 
treacheiy, trickery, 204, 19. 

G 


trinite, sb., OF. trinite; trinity, 116, 
14. 

trist, sb.., OF. tristre, triste ; appointed 
place, rendezvous, 173, 18. 
trist, tryst, sb., perhaps OM. ^tr^st 
(tryst), cf. ON. tieista, vb . ; trust, 
confidence, 51, 15 ; trj^ste, loS, 

5 - 

Tristrem, sb., OF. Tristrem; Tris* 
tre7}i, 326, 17. 
trofle, see trufle. 
trpde, troden, see trfde(n). 
trpne, sb., OF. trone, throne ; throne, 
157, II ; thrpne, J02, 26. 
trotevale, sb. (?), origin uncertain ; 

idle talk, 57, 21. 
trontli (tronthe), see trowSe. 
tro'we(n), wkv,, OE. treowian; be’ 
lieve, trust] htf. trowwenn (O), 9, 
6; pr. 1 sg. trowwe (O), 9, 12; 
trowe, 225, 27 ; pt. sg. trowede, 76, 
17. Nth. inf. tiow, 341, 26. Cf. 
trewe(n). 

trowpe, trouth, sb., OE. treow'S, f. ; 
U'uih, honor, covenant, tf'oth ; 
troww 3 ?e (O), 8, 14; tiouthe, 95, 2. 
Nth, trouth, 135, 4. 
tro’wwe(n), see trowe(n). 

Troye, Troy, sb., OF. Troie ; 7>oy, 
220, 3. Nth. Troy, 126, 5. 
trdandis, sb., OF. truandise; im^ 
posture, begging, 134, ii. 
truble(n), OF, Irubler; trouble, 
pr. pi. trublen, loi, 7 ; pp. trubled, 
102, 22. 

trufle, trofle, sb., OF. trufle ; trifle, 
nonsense; trofle, 334, ii ; pi, 
trufles, 218, 13. 

truMe(n), tokv., Sth.^Ml. tnike(n) ; 
OE. trucian j fail, be lacking ; pr. 
sbj, sg. trukie, 199, 11. 
trukne(n), vokv., OE. *trucnian, cf. 
trojd\axi] faU,be lacking; pr. 3 sg. 
trukeneiii, 192, 14. 

trume, OE. truma; troop, band, 
186, 31, 

trust0(n), see tryste(n). 
trust!, adj., Sth. =* Ml. trist! ; OM- 
♦trystig, cf. Dan. trostig; confidens 
of, trusty, 198, 29. 
tryste, see trist. 

2 



45 ^ 


GLOSSARY 


tryste(ii), wkv,, OM. *trystan (?), cf. 
ON. treysta ; trusi ; pr, i sg. tryste, 
1 14, 26. Sth./r. 3 sg, triisteSj 192, 
14; pt. sg. triiste, 192, 14. 
tii, see pu. 

txielfte, twelffce, adf.j OE. twelfta ; 

twelfth, 152, 15. 
tuhen, see te(n). 

tii]ite(ii), wk,, Stli. =: Ml. tihte(n) ; 
OE. tyhtan ; draWy move ; pt. sg. 
tuhte, 188, 24; pt.pl tuhten, 189, 
20. 

tnk, see take(n). 

t^, toun, sh., OE. tun; town; ds, 
tune^3, a6; toun, 52, 19. Sth. 
ds. toune, 210, 8. 

tunder, sb., ON. tundr, cognate with 
OE. “bynder ; tinder, 20, 7. 
tune(ii), see ttiyiie(rL). 
tunge, tdnge, eME. tunge, sb., OE. 
tunge; tongue; tunge, 10, 23; 
tunge, 76, 4 ; tonge, 59, 2. Nth. 
tong, 134, 4. ^ 

tunscipe, sb,, OE. tiinscipe ; inhabi- 
tants of a town, 4, 3. 

tur, tohr, sb., OF.Jur ; tower, 6,^8 ; 
pi, tures, 37, 8 ; toures, 49, i ; tours, 
152, 4- 

turment, sb., OF. turment ; torment, 
suffering 104, 4. 

turmentour, sb., OF. tormenteour; 

tormentor , persecutor, 140, 13. 
turmentry, sb , OF. torment erie ; 

instruments of torture, 138, 1 6. 
tume(n), t6rn6(ii), wku., OE. tur- 
nian ; turn ; inf. turnnenn (O), 8, 
21; tum = turne, 68 , 2; pr. 3 sg. 
turmeJ)|j, 10, 30 ; pr. shj. sg, loume, 
2 2 8, 26; imp. sg, tnme, 102, 30; 
imp, pL tnrnep, 103, i ; pt. sg. 
turned, 45, 8 ; pt. pi. tumde, 223, 
j8; pp. tornd, 55, 26. Nth. pr. 3 
ig. tumes, 144, 18; p 7 \ sbj.pl. turn, 
167, 28. Sth.//>. iturned, 191, 19 ; 

ytumd, 225, 30. 

tus, see pus. 

Tjusk, sb., OE, tusc ; tusk ; pi. tuskes, 
195, 12. 

tuyne(ix), wkv., WMl. = Ml. tTne(n); 
OE. tynan; enclose, close, shut; 
imp. sg Twith excrescent d) tnynde, 


1 2 1, II. Sth. imp, pi. tfineS, 200, 
14. 

twa, adj., Nth. = ML twg ; OE. twa; 

two, 170, 22. 
tway, see tweie. 

Twede, sb., Tweed, 159, 8. 
tweie, tway, tweien, twei3e, adj., 
OE. twegen; twain, two, 35, 19; 
tway, 66, 5. eSth. tweije, 18S, 25 ; 
tweien, 190, 14. 

twelfmonpe, sb., OE.tweolf 4* monet?, 
twelvemonth, year, 204, 7. 
twelve, adj., OE. twelf, twelve; 
twelve, 34, 15. 

twenti, cuj., OE. twentig; twenty, 
4 ) 10. 

twi5es, twies, adv., OE. twiga 4* es ; 
twice ; twi55ess (0), 10, 7 ; twies, 
199, 29. 

twin, adj., ON. tvinnr; two, twin, 
15- 

twist, sb,, OAng. twist, cf. MDu. 

twist; branch, twig, 172, 6. 
two, twp, adj,, OE. twa ; two, 22, 29 ; 
to, 1 1 7, 2. Nth. tw’a, q.v. Sth. 
twg, 238, 4. 

twye, adv,, OE. tw)a<twiwa; twice, 

_43. 8. 

tyde, ty^ear, see tide, tfr. 
tyene(n), wkv.. Bit. =;M1. tene(n) ; 
WS. tienan, OM. tenan ; harm, 
irritate, weary oneself; imp. sg. 
tyene, 217, 19. 

tyl, tylie, tylle(n), see til, tile(n). 
tyme, see time. 

tyne(n), wkv,, ON.tyna ; lose ; Nth. 
inf. tyne, 166, 21 ; pp. tynt, 167, 24. 

p, B. 

iSa (pa), pe, see pe, pat. 
pa, adv. conj., eME. Nth. for Ml. p§ 
(^9) ; OE. '^a ; tkcfi, when, 1,1. 
pa, p8ln (pa, pm), see pat, pe. 
pmnne, see panne. , 
pmr (tmr) and compounds, see per. 
pmre, ‘Scerf, see per, Purve(n), 
pmt, see pat. 
paj, pah, see pe^. 

pai (pam), paimselfe (paymselfe, 
pamselfe), see pey, self. 



GLOSSARY 


453 


paiTQ, see J)e55r^. 

]?an, see pe. 

J?an, ^an, see J)anne. 
pane, pank, sb.^ OE. 5 'anc, ‘cJgnc ; 
thought, favor, thanks', gs. here 
pankes, by the will of them, willmgly^ 

6, 31 ; ennnen pane, know or feci 
g?-atitude, show favor, ij^S, 14. 

pane, sec pe. 

panke(n), wkv., OE. pancian, pgn- 
cian ; thank ; hif pannkenn (O), 8, 
26; fit, pL thankyd, 112, 14; pp. 
panked, 97, 25. 

panne, IJanne, pan, co 7 y,, OE. panne, 
ponne ; thati ; panne, 4, 8 ; tJanne, 
14, II ; pan, 3, 31; gJan, 18, 17. 
eSth.. pcenne, 176, 22; pen, 176, i; 
peone, 1S7, 9 ; teonne, 200, i. 
par, tJar and compounds, see per. 
parat, parbi, see perate, perbi. 
par, pare, see pe55re. 
pare, adv,, irth. for Ml. pgre ; OE. 

para; there, no, 29. 
partill, see pertil. 
parwitli, pas, see perwytb, pis. 
pat, tJat, that, eoft/.f OE, pset ; that ; 
?Sat, I, 2 j (O), 8, 24; tatt (O), 
8, 21 ; that, 54, 19 ; thatt, 146, 23. 
Sth. tet, 197, 15. 

pat, iSat, defu, pm., OE. pjiet ; that, 
the ; ©at, 1,3; past (eME.), 7, 27 ; 
patt (0), 8, 20; tat, 14, 14; pi. 
those, the, pa (eME.), 2, ii ; tp < 
>?; 5 , 2 ; 21, 8. 3Srth. (ON.) 

pi. plr, 148, 26; sg. p!r, 149, 29, 
ath. pet, 177, 27. 

pat, that, rel* prn., sg, and^/. ; OE. 
paet, dem, ; that, which ; patt (O), 
8 , 20 ; tatt (O), 9, 3 ; pet (eME.), 

7, 19; pat (eME.), 176, 7; pi. 
patt (O), 9, 10 ; that, that which^ 
120, 15. Nth. at < pat, 174, 31, 
Sth. ds. pon, 192, 3. 

pahh, see pfh. 
pay, see pey. 

pe, rel. pm. ; OE. pe ; that, who, 
which, 1,6; tSe, 14, 15. Sth. pe, 
176, 10; >a, 179,4. 
pe, thS, d^. art*, OE, se, infl. by 
p-forms5 the, i, 2 ; se (eME.), i, 
13; Se, 14, i; te, 5, 9; the, i, 12; 


e in at e, at the, 212, 32. Sth. pe, 

176, 21 ; se (eSth.), 177, 26 ; peo, 
19I, 26; das. pene, iSi, 5; pen, 
184, 10 ; pane (SEMI.), 47, 19 ; 

fds. pere, 182, 3 : ter, 201,1: fas. 
pa, iSi, 21 ; pi. ;^o, 191, 25 ; dpi. 
pan, 178, 9; vorp^n, becatise, there- 
fore, 183, 29, Kt. sT, 21 1, 10; e, 
218, 2^', fas. t9< P9, 2ir, 7. 
pe, te, adv., OE. py, instr. the in 
phrases like the 9 ?iore ; te, 9, 1 1 ; 
pe, 122, 9. Cf. ngpelfs. 
peavie(n), wkv., OE. iSafian; perniit', 
inf peavlen, 194, 31. 
pede, eME, ped, sh., OE. ‘ 5 eod, y.; 
people, nation ; ped, 9, 6 ; pi. pede, 
II, II ; pi. tJeden (SEMI.), 29, 14. 
pedyr, see pider. 

pef, OE. tieof* thief', theef, 239, 
13 ; pi, theves, 242, 26. Nth. pi. 
thevis, 175, 13. eSth. ds. peove, 

177, 19; pi. peoves, 221, 19. Kt. 
])Jef. 219, 33. 

pe^, pei^, pey, pa^, C 07 ij., OM. peh 
(peh), WS. peak ; though) pej, 37, 
17 ; >ei 5 , 58, 5 ; pey, 59, 15 ; pa 5 , 
125, 21. Sth. pfh, 176, 4; pah, 
1S9, 25 ; pauh, 199, 9 ; pey5, 224, lo. 
pe53, pe55ra, see pey. 
pe55pe (per), paire (pare, per), pos. 
pm., based on ON. gpl. peira; 
their) pej^re (O), 9,4; per, 108, 20; 
ther, 115, 28. Nth. paire, 140, 14; 
pare, 127, 30; per, 126, 6; pere, 
127, 32 ; par, 134, 14 ; pair, 153, 5. 
pegn, pegn, pein, sh. OE. pegn; 
soldier, servant, thane, pi. peines, 
187, 24. 
pfh, see pe^. 

pfhwhe'oep, adv. conj., Sth, «= Ml, 
pohwheper ; WS. peah hwse^Jere 
(hwetJere) ; yet, nevertheless^ but, 
180, 9. 

pei5, pern, see pe5, pey. 
pen, pSn (pene), see panne, pS. 
penche(n), penke(n), pinke(n), 
wkv., OE. tJencean-fehte (tJohte); 
think) inf. pench$, 100, 17 ; penke, 
5 ; pynke, 91, 32 ; pink, 72, loj 
imp. sg* ffenke, 32, 8 ; pt. sg. po^te, 
35, 13 ; iioht, 39, 10 ; poucte, 80, 



454 


GLOSSARY 


II ; p(. 2 S£. jjohlitesst (O), 8, 21 ; 

Jfl. >oght, 105, 1 8. Sth. 
Jjenchen, 202, 31 ; pr. 3 Senchet, 
178, 22 ; pr. sdj. ])enche, 207, 9; 
pr, ppL jjenchinge, 216, 25 ; pt, 2 
s^. Johtest, 183, 4. 

Penchen, seem, see piiiolie(n). 
pencliinge, sb., based on OK. ])encan, 
})encean; thinking, 216, 25. 
penke, ‘Senke, see penclie(n). 
pennes, adv., OE. tJanon, infl. by -cs 
ending; thence, 223, 5, 
peo, see pe, pg. 
peone, see panne, 
peos, peove, see pis, pef. 
per, see pe55re. 

per, tier, ther, par, &c., adi)*, OM. 
? 5 er, WS. ; there, where ; per, i, 
6; ?yer, 14, 5; ther, 2, 19; t^r= 
per, 9, 5 ; par, 2, 24; thare, 4, 18. 
Sth. pfr, 176, 22; p^e, 179, 10; 
Sfre, 177, 26. 

peras, adv., OM. ? 5 er, WS. 0 ^r + ME. 

as, there where, where, 197, 5. 
perate, adv., OM. per + set; thereat, 
64, 12. K'th. parat, 163, 6. 
perbi, pfrby, adzj., OM. SerbI, WS. 
‘^Jarbl; thereby', Sth. pfrby, 225, 4. 
KTth, parbi, 129, 25. 
pfre, pere, see pe, pe53re. 
perefter, adv,, OM. perefter, WS. 
pier sefter; thereafter, i, 9. Sth. 
tfrefter < PI refter, 197, 16. 
tJexffre, parffre, adv., conj., OM. 
per + fore; therjor, therefore, 39, 
II ; parfgre, 63, 13. Sth. pfrfgre, 
180, 24; pfrvore, 181, 13 ; pfrvgre, 

215,7. 

perinne, pserinne, thereynne, 
parinne, adv., OM. per + inne ; 
therein, 3, 12; parinne, 3, 13; 
parinne, 3, 32 ; thereynne, 121, 20 ; 
prinne, 81, 20. 

permit, adv., OM, per, WS. poer + 
mid; therewith, 63, 20. 
peme, see pis. 

tierof, perofBs, theroflfe, thereof, 
parof, &c., adv,, OM. per 4 of; 
thereof, 20, 3 ; peroffe, 76, 7 ; ther- 
79> 5 y thereof, 106,. 9 ; tharof, 
2, 22. Sth, pfrof, 185, 18. 


'Keron, peronne (-^n), adv,, OM. 
tier 5= on; thereon', feon, 16, 8; 
t^ronne, 9, 5. 

^erfver, adv., OM. ?Jer + ofer ; there- 
over, 15, 19. 

perpurh, adv., OM. ?yer + Surh ; there- 
through', p^rpurh, 7, 2. 
pertil, adv., OM. ? 5 er + til ; tlm-eto, 
49, 24. irth. partill, 171, 22. 
perto, parts, adv., OM. her + to; 

thereto', 87, 17 ; parto, 4, 14. 
pfrvore, see perfore. 
perwyp, adv., OM. 2Ser + wi'c 5 ; there- 
with, 88, 14. Uth. parwith, 134, 2. 
“iJes, pes, peos, see pis. 
pess, adv., OE. Sses; used adverbially; 
so much ; all pess te bettie, so nmch, 
wholly better by this, 9,11. 
pesternisse, sb„ OE. Seostemess, f ; 
darkness, 6^, 21. 

pestre(n), pestre(n), wkv., OE. 
?Jeostrian ; become dark ; pt, sg, 
pestrede, i, 14. 
et, see pat. 

e'Sen (-in), thepen, adv., ON.t^atJan, 
?ietian; thence, 23, i ; the))en, 131, 
18; pepin, 137, 8. 

tiew, thew, sb., OE. tieaw ; citstom, 
virtue, archaic thews, tS, 6; pi. 
thewes, 121, 8. 

pey, pe53, thei, pai, prn. pi., ON. 
pei ; they,^ 56, 23 ; pejs (O), 9, 26 ; 
te55 (O), 10, 14; thei, 60, 5; dat.- 
acc. pe55»^ (O), 9, n ; pem, 116, 4 ; 
them, 105, 22. Nth. pai, 126, 16 ; 
dat.-acc, pa3'm, 144, 15; thaym, 
144, 4; pam, 127, 8. Sth, pay, 
221, 24. 

pey, pey3, % see pe5, pin, 

Jjider (pedyr), adv., OE. pider, 
pyder ; thither, to that place, 5,22; 
p^yr, 99, 10 ; thider, 241, 20. Sth. 
piider, 177, 27. 

piderward, adv., OE, tJiderweard; 

thitherward, 189, 24. 
tiierf, see purve(n). 
pikke, adv., ON. pykkr, cogn. with 
OE. tSicce ; thickly, 207, 30. 
pilke, pilk, prn., OE. pylc ; such, 
that, 37, II ; pilk, 228, 4, Sth. 
pUlk^, 204, 13. 



GLOSSARY 


455 


pin, pi, pos. pm,, OE. ?5ln; thine ^ 8, 
i8; 8i, 30, 14; tine, 18, 19. 

pinohe(n), pinke(n\ wkw., OE. 
tyyncean-tJuhte (Snhte) ; semi^ ap- 
pear ; inf, 'Sinche, 1 78, 6 ; penchen 
(infl. by penchen), 103, 9 ; 3 sg. 

?JinketS, 32, 19 ; pincp (eME.), 176, 
5 ; mep^nkep, 109,20; pt sg. tSugte, 
21, 28 ; pu5te, 38, 2 ; pou5t, 71, 5 ; 
poght, 90, 24; pou^ht, 228, 7; 
thoughte, 237, 19. mb. pr, 3 sg, 
me thine (for thinks ?), 133, 15; 
pr, ppl thynkande, 144, 3. Sth. 
P‘>^' sg- punched, 202, 29 ; pt, sg, 
puhte, 1 86, 3. Kt. inf. penche, 2 1 3, 
16. 

ping, pyng, eME. ping, sb,y OE. 
?Jing, n , ; thmg, i, 17 ; pi, ping, 42, 
29; pinge, 38, 13; Pyng, 88, 11; 
pinges, 204, 26. 

pink, pinketJ, see penche(n), pin- 
olie(n). 

pinne, adj.^ OE. pynne ; thin, 55, 28. 

pir, see pat. 

iirl, sb,, OE. tlyrel ; perforation, hole, 
•window, 1 7, 7. Sth. ds, piirle, 197, 
18. 

pirst, 3rist, sb,, OE. ^nrst, infl. by 
Syrstan, Syrslig; thirst, 54, 2; 
prist, 30, 15 ; porst, 219, 6. 

pis, pys, 'Kis, this, prn,,pl, pas, pgs, 

OE. pis, neut. ; this, 1,1; piss (O), 
8, 24 ; tiss (O), 11,2; tis, 16, 13 ; 
thys, 112, 3; SEMI./, sg. pes, 
37? 19; 8S? 7 ; P^- >as (eME.), 

I, 19 ; eJes, 23, 16 ; hke, 24, 3 ; 
pese, 50, 5* Sth. mns. pes, 177 , 17 ; 
i/igs. peos, 1S5, 6 ; mds, pissen, 184, 
13 ; nias. pisne, 183, 22 ; peme, 217, 
,3; peos (eSth.), 198, ii;fds, 
pissere, 184, 24; pi, peos (eSth.), 
199, 25; peose, 221, n; pi, p^s, 
212,11. 

piself, pyself, see self. 

pisne, pissen, pissere, see pis. 

i§, adv,, eME., mh. ]}& (i5a); OE. 
liJa ; then, when, since, because, 14, 
16* Sth. peo, 201, 3; P9, 203, 23. 

poght(e), po^te, see p0nche(n), 
pinohe(n). 

pogt, see poht. 


poh, ^Sog, P05, pogh, tho-we, pof, 
conj., ON. p6, earlier poh ; cogn. 
with OM. ‘6eh, WS. tJeah; though 
pohh (O), II, 3 ; iSog, 16, 4; po5, 50^ 
7; pogh, 1 14, 23; thowe, iii, 26; 
pop = po pe (?), 2, 17. Nth. pof, 
128, 23; pofe, 146, 2. Cf. pe5. 
pohhtesst, see penke(n). 
poht, 'Sogt, pouht, sb., OE. S5ht, 
^oht; thought*, pohht (O), 8, 23; 

23, 15; pi, pouhtes, 201, 8. 
poht, see penehe(n). 
pohwethere, popwethere, adv, cemj, 
prep,, ON. p5 (poh) hwaetere, hwe- 
tJere ; notwithstanding, nevertheless, 
2, 15 ; popwethere, 4, 13 ; popwse- 
there, 7, 14. 

]>9l(e), pflede, see J)9le(ii). 
pglemodenesse, see pglmodnesse. 
p9le(n), eME. pole(n), wkv,, OE. 
polian ; bear, suffer, endure ; inf, 
polen (eME.), 6, 8 ; polenn (O), 9, 
12 ; p^le, 45, i\pr.2 sg, pglest, 43, 
10 ; pt,pL poleden, 4, 9 ; pp, pglede, 
40, 6. Nth. inf pgl, i^8, 8 ; pr. 3 
sg. pgles, 150, II. Sth. (SEME) 
inf pglie, 43, 6; pglye, 217, 14; 
pp, ipgled, 212, 21. 
p9lm6dnesse, sb,, OE. iJolmSdness, 
f, ; patience, long suffering, endur- 
ance, 96, 27 ; p9lemddenesse,232, 8, 
p9lye, pon, see p9l©(n), pat. 
ponk, sb., OE. 0anc (‘6’onc) ; thought, 
gratitude, favor; ds.'^oik,% 183, 14. 
ponfce(n), wkv,, OE. ©ancian, 6on- 
cian ; thank ; pr. i sg, ponke, 38, 
29 ; pt. sg. ponkede, 47, 8, 

^fr, adv,, OE. Sar; there, where, 21, 
1 5 ; fSgr bifgren, lit, hefo 7 *e there, 
but before it or them, 

^grbi, adv., OE. tJar + bl ; thereby, 23, 
10. 

^gve, pgtre, adv„ OE. para, emphatic 
form ofp&r; there, 16, 17. 

ISgrfore, P9rf5re,a<3fe/.,OE. fer + fore; 
therefore, 22, 18. 

ISgrof, 'Soroffen, adv., OE. 0ar + of; 

thereof, 27, 20 ; C^roffen, 32, 19. 
porst, porte, see pirst, purve(n). 
■Sgrtil, adv,, OE. tJar+til; thereto, 

31? 19* 



456 


GLOSSARY 


]>oru (poru^), see purh. 
porutUke, adv., OE. |>urliut + lice ; 
thoroughly, through and through, 
85, 28. 

P9S, see pis. 

pop (and compounds), see poll, 
posand, possand, see pusend. 
poll, pouete, see pu, peiic]ie(n). 
pought, pou5t, see pme 3 ie(n). 
pdusande, pousond, pouzen, see 
p-dsend. 
pous, see ®us. 

praJ, sb,, ON. thrall, slave, 

servant, 55, 2. 

^Jraldom, sh,, ON. Sr^ldomr ; thral- 
dom, 30, 2. 

prasten, wkv,, OE. ^Jr^stan; press, 
force ; pt. sg. praste, 60, 23. 
pre, "Sre, adj., OE. tJreo ; three, 56, 
23; thre, I, 15. JEt. prl, 216, 
21. 

prenge(n), wkv., OK, *prengan ; press, 
forces pt, pi. prengden, 3, 12. 
preoMd, sb., based on OE. Sri, iSreo ; 
trinity, 197, ii. 

pretend, adj., OAng. ? 5 reote^Se, infl. 

byCreotene; thirteenth, 152, 16. 
^Jretene, adj., OM. tyreolene, WS. 

??reotIene, -tene ; thirteen, 5, 15. 
pri, see pr§. 

pridde, adj., OE. Sridda; third, 8, 
15. Ntli. thrid, 137, 23; thyrde, 
143, 27. 

■Uries, adv., OM. 'Sriga < ^Jiie + es ; 
thrice, 14, 10, 

prin, adj., ON- prinnr; threefold, 
triple, 87, I. 

prinne, ®rist, see perinne, pirst, 
priste, adj., OE. ? 5 riste ; bold, 176, 
19. 

'!Sriste(n), wkv., ON. tJrysta; thrust-, 
pt. pl, tJristen, 23, 14; pp. priste, 
84, 18. 

«ritti, adj., OE. ?Jritig, tJrittig ; thirty, 
32, 17, Nth. thtritte, 132, 10. 
prittu^Je, adj , OE. ??ritigo^Je; thir- 
tieth, for thirty ?, 197, 4. 
prive(n), siv,, ON. tJrxfa, ME. priven- 
prgf (i) ; thrive ; inf 4. thrive, '80, 
20; pr. sbj. sg. prive, 54, 7; pp. 
priven, 51, 17. 


prg (pro ?), adj., ON. prar ; bold, 
strong, 51, 17- 
prof, see perof. 

^rgte, sb., OE. tJrotu ; throat, 19, 9. 

eMB. throte, 3, 16. 
prou, see purh. 

pruh, sb., OE. pmh, ; coffin, I 97 j I- 
pryft, sb., ON. prift ; thrift, prospeidty, 

pu, thu, pou, t^u, prn., OE. pu; 
thou, ^ 25; pou, 48, 13; 1^, 17, 
25 ; tou, 49, 24 ; u, 37, 2 ; ou, 30, 
II ; das. ®e, 31, 31 ; te, 8, iS; pi. 
ge, 16, 13 ; 5e, 38, iS; ye, 78, 25 ; 
gpl. gure, 29,__3 o; dapl. gu, 28, 4 ; 
yii, 78, 24 ; 50W, 88, 19. Nth. pi. 
5he (5e), 166, 10 ; yuu, 131, f. Sth. 
das. eow (eSth.), 177, 26; eou , 
(eSth.), 184^ 6; ii, 193, ii ; ow, 
194, 24; ou, 197, 20; sew, 226, 
20; d. dual, inc, 195, 3. 
puder, see pider. 

puderward, adv., Sth. = Ml. pider- 
ward ; IWS. ©yderweard ; thither- 
ward, 206, 2. 

pugte, pu^te, puht, see pinche(n). 
piilke, see pilke. 

pumbe, eME. pumbe, sb., OE. puma; 

thumb ; pi. pumbes, 3, 7. 
punche(n), see pinche(n). 
purh, 'Surg, pur, purch, purgh, 
purghe, purghe, pure^, poru, 
poru5, thorow, prep, adv., OE. 
purh ; thi-ough, on account of, 1,4; 
>ur, 5 ; 3; ]>iirrh (O), 8 , 14; tJurg, 
14, 2 ; purch, 64, 19 ; purgh, 95, 
15; pares, 42, 29 ; porus, 61, 23; 
poru, 76, 2 ; thorow, 105, 23. Nth. 
thoro, 1 31, 5 ; Ihurgh, 140, 10 ; 
throu, 166, 5. Sth. purh, 177, 17. 
purhl6ke(n), wkv., OE. ’•'purhlScian ; 
look through, examine ; inf. purrh- 
lokenn (0), 9, 20. 

purhseke(n), wkv., OE. purhsecan- 
sohte (sohte) ; seek out, seek through ; 
inf, purrhsekenn (O), 9, 20. 
t 5 urhse(n), stv., OE. tSurhseon-seah 
(5) ; see through, penetrate with the 
sight', pr. 3 sg. ? 5 urhsih? 5 , 179, r. 
purl, purrh, see pirl, purh, 
purrhlokenn, see puxhloke(n). 



GLOSSARY 


457 


J»urrlisefcenii, see ]jiirlLseke(u). 
pursday, sd., OE. Dunresdseg; Thurs- 
day, 231, 20. 

J)urve(n), ptprv., OE. tJurfan-ISuifte 
(tyorfte) ; 7teed\ pr. 3 sg. Sserf 
(eME.), 177, 21 ; pr, sbj. sg, Sierf 
(eSth.), 177, 19; Jjoi-te, 59, 
13 ; ])urt, 96, 2:. 

^Sus, ISus, OE. 'Sus ; thus, in this 
7 nc^i 7 ter, i6, 22; tus, 16, 15. Kt. 
})oiis, 215, 19. 

J>usend, jjjousand, sh., OE._^usend, 
nent.\ thousand, 3, iS; J)ousande, 
64, 26; ])dusond, 215, II ; ])ouzen, 
219, 13 ; thosand, 126, 6 ; tliossand, 
132, 3. Sth. ]?usende, 185, 28. 
pTiagsLt, adz/., OE. ])us + gate; hi this 
wayy 150, 25. 

J> 5 .stre, sb., Sth. == Ml. J)Istre; OE. 
Slestre (’c^ysstre), beside Seostre; 
darkness, 178, 20. 

pustre, adj., Sth. = Ml. J)Istre ; WS. 

'Siestre, ; dark, 178, 21. 
J>wart§ver; adj,, ON, ])vert + ME. 

§ver; crossing, extending, 221, 27. 
pwertut, adv,, ON. jjwert, neut. of 
J>werr + Qt ; thoroughly, completely ; 
_3)\veiTtrit (0)j 9, 23. 

J)y©f, pyng, see pef, ping, 
pynk© (n ) , see penche (n) , pinche(n) , 
pys, see pis. * 

IT, 

u, ufel, ulle, see pu, y vel, willo. 
Tiglxnes, sb., ON. wggligr + ME. 

-ness; ugliness, 148, 12. 
um, prep,, ON. nm, cogn. with OE. 
ymbe; round, about, after \ um 
wile, at times, now and then, 3, 23. 
hnibe, adv. prep^ Sth. « Ml. imbe?; 
OE, ymbe ; round about, after, 183, 
30. 

umbethynk©(n), wkv., ON. nm + 
OE. be'Sencean; consider, meditate; 
imp. nmbethynke, 146, 13. 
•ambilapp©(n), wkv., ON. nm h- OE. 
*beiappen ?, cf. OE. lieppa ; sur- 
round, <over; pt, pL nmbilappid, 

142? 23, 

ilmbndei, sb,, Sth, = Ml. emberdai. 


OE. ymbrendseg ; emherday, one of 
three fast days occu 7 'ring in each 
season ; pL iimbndawes, 200, 2. 
Timsette(n), zvkv., ON. *umsetta, 
cogn. with OE. ymbsettan ; sur- 
round, beset; pi. pi. umsette, 132, 

17- 

unavysedly, adv.yhsLsed on OF. avis^ 
sb. ; unadvisedly, 146, 30. 
nnbald, adj,, eME. = Ml. unbgld ; 
OM. unbald, W'S. iinbeald ; timid, 
unbold, 183, 29. 

tinbmd©(n), -b^de(iL), stv,, OE. 
onbindan (imbindan)-band (bgnd) 
(3); unbind; 2;^. unbinde, 91, 10; 
pt. sg. unbend, 26, 31 ; pt. pi. un- 
bounden, 83, 14; pp. unbunde, 
39 > a- 

unblendyde, adj., OE. un + pp. of 
OE. blendan ; unmixed, tmblended, 
144, 10. 

nnboht, adj. <^pp. , OE. by cgan ; un- 
bought, wiatoned for, 178, 3. 
nnbgnd, iinbotinden, unbunde, 
see ■unbinde(n). 

nncerteyn, adj., OE. un + OF. cer- 
tein ; uncertain, 102, 7. 
uncl9pe(n), wkv., OE. un + claSian ; 

unclothe ; pt. sg. unclg^ede, 85, 7. 
ancomli, adj., based on OE. cyme (?) ; 
uncomely, 52, 6. 

uncost, sb., ON. kostr, 'choice, vir- 
tue’ ; vice, 18, ii. 
uncutJ, see xmkulS, 
undep, adj., OE. undeop ; not deep, 
12. 

under, OE. under; under; 

unnderr (O), S, 17. 
underf6(n;, stv., OE. underfon-feng 
(R)*; receive ; imp. sg. underfeng, 
190, 24 ; pt. sg. underfeng, 2, 8 ; 
pp. underf^gen (eME.), 2, 19 ; 
underfgnge, 213, 25. Sth. imp.pl, 
undervS je, 203, 7; pt. sg, under- 
veng, 210, 9 ; pt. pi. undervengen, 
187, 10. 

undergete(n), 3et6(n), stv., OM. 
undergetan CWS. gietan)-g0et (WS, 
‘geat(5)); obtain, get, perceive; 
pt. pi. underg^eton (eME.), 2, 
pp. undexjete, 39, 14. 



458 


GLOSSARY 


tmderg9(n), anv„ OE. uiidergan(?) ; 
undergo^ take care of (X) J sbj\ sg, 
undergg, 231, 19. 

underling, sb,, OE. underling; in- 
ferior^ subject^ 183, 17. 
underniine(,n), stv.^ OE. under- 
niman-nom (4) ; take^ take un- 
awares ; pp* undernumen 24, 7 ; 
undemdmen, 55, 19. 
understande(n), -stonde(n), siv,^ 
OE. understandan-stod (6) ; under- 
stand^ receive \ inf unnderrstann- 
denn (0), 9, 10; understand, 72, 
13 ; undyrstgnde, 90, 15 ; undur- 
st^nde, 106, I ; pr, 3 sg, understont, 
198,9; imp, sg, understand, 216, 
13; imp, pi. underst§nde]>, 206, 26; 
pt, sbj. sg. understode , 2 04, 2 . Krth. 
pr. 3 sg. understandes, 134, 8. Kt. 
inf, 6nderst§nde, 218, 26; pr, sbj. 
pi., onderstgnde, 218, 23. 
iindertake(n 5 > siv., OE. under + ON. 
taka-tok ip) ; undertake ; pt. sbj. 
sg. undertoke, 76, 12, 
under])ede(n), wkv., OM. under- 
pedan, WS. J)Tedan (Jjeodan) ; make 
subject ; inf. under])eden, i, 3. 
undertoke, see undertake(n). 
underveng, underv6(n), under- 
f6(ii)_. 

undevgcyone, sb., OE. un + OF. de- 
vocion ; lack of devotion, 146, 9. 
undirstandynge, sb., OE. under- 
standing, f. ; intelligence, under- 
standing, 143, 6. 

underwrite(n ) , stv., OE. underwritan- 
wrat(i); subscribe, sign', pp. un- 
dirwriten, 116, 20. 

und6(n), anv., OE. ondon, undon; 

undo ; inf. undon, 23, 18. 
undren, sb., OE. undem; time from 
nine to twelve, morning, 28, 13. 
unduEti, adj., OE. *undylitig; un- 
profitable, unavailing, 192, 5, 
unfiie, uneape, adj,, adv., OE. 
uneatJe ; difficult, with difficulty, 
i8t, it. Kt. uneape, 215, i. 
un^es, see unnfSes. 
unfsre, adj., OE, unfere; disabled, 
infirm, 132, 9. 

unf9lde(n), stv., OM. unfaldan (fal- 


dan), WS. fealdan-feold (R) ; un- 
fold, open ; pt, sg. unfeld, 05, 28. 
unfor3olde, adj., elOl. based on OE. 

forgildan; unrequited, 178, 3. 
unfrro, sb., OE. unfri?y ; discord, lack 
of peace, 2, 10. 

unhelpe, sb., OE. unh^l?J,^ ; illness, 
lack of health, 176, 16. 
unhold, adj., OE. unhold (hold) ; 
disloyal, unfriendly, ungracious, 
177, 12. 

unhoneste, sb., OE. un + OF. 

honeste ,* dishonesty, 146, 29. 
unimfte, adj., Sth. — Ml. unimete ; 
OM. ungemete, WS. ungem^te ; 
immeasurable, unnumbered, 181, 

18. 

unisfli, adj., Sth. = Ml. unseli; 
WS. ungesselig, OM. ungeselig ; 
unhappy, unfortunate, 199, 15. 
unkevele(n), wkv., OE. un + ON. 
kefla ; ungag', pt. pi. unkeveleden, 
83, 14, 

unkinde, adj , OE. uncynde ; strange, 
unkind, foreign, 29, 14. 
unkonning, adj., based on cnnne(n) ; 

uncunning, ignorant, 235, 16, 
unkuiJ, adj., OE. uncu® ; unac- 
quainted, 16, 25 ; uncu? 5 , 19, 14. 
urik^dely, adv., OE. *uncyndellce, 
uncyndelice ; umfaturally, 238, 3, 
unlahe, sb., OE. unlagn; violation 
of law, injustice, sin; Sth. pi. 
unlahen, 196, 8. 

unlggfPuUich, adv , OE, ungeleaf- 
frdlice ; unfaithfiUly, wrongly, 236, 

19. 

unlfveful, adj., OE. ungeleafful ; 
unfaithful, 235, 6. 

unlioh (-lych), ctdj., Sth. = Ml. un- 
lik ; OE. unllc ; unlike, 194, 2. 
unlust, sb., OE. unlust ; displeasure, 
54 , 17- 

unme*®, adj., OM. *unine^ 5 , sb., WS. 

matJ ; unmeasured, 192, 4. 
unmep (mfp), sb., OM. unmep, WS. 
-mffip ; lack of moderation, error, 
blame, 43, 5. 

unmyghtty, adj., OE., unmihtig; 

feeble, impotent, 146, 28, 
uimo, see ic. 



GLOSSARY 


459 


imnedeful, adj.^ OE. *unneodfnl ; 

unnecessary, 235, 6. 
unneile(n), OE. ^onnaeglian; 

unnail, loose frofn nails ; ;pL sg^ 
imneilede, 230, 13. 

Tinne(n), ptprv., OE. unnan-utJe; 
grafii, favor ; pr. sbj. sg. imne, 8, 
II ; pr, sbfjpl. unnen, wish, 183, 
8 ; pu sg, ou}>e, 53, 15. 
unnftSes, unfSes, adv., OE. iinea‘tJe 
+ es ; with difficulty, sca^-cely, 1 7, 8. 
unnit, sb,, OE. unnytt ; vanity, 
frivolity ; annitt (O), 9, 27. 
unnkerr (O), pos, prn., OE. uncer ; 

our (dual), ^us two, 9, 26. 
unniit, adf, Sth. = Ml. unnit ; OE. 

unnytt ; useless, 1 76, 5. 
unprenable, adj,, ME. un + OF. 
prenable; imp 7 'egnable, improper, 
wrong, 233, 28. 
unriclit, see unrilit. 
unride, adj,, OE. ungerpde; rough, 
violent, 19, 7. 

unrikt, unriclit, sb,, OE. imriht ; 
wrong, evil, 179, 4; unricht, 212, 
23, 

unryghtwysely, adv., OE. unriht- 
wislice; unrighteonsly, 144, 16. 
uns 6 h 3 >pe, adj,, OE. un + sceapen, 
pp , ; unformed, unpleasant, out- 
landish, 225, 26. 

unsohill, sb., OE. *unscil ; indisc7‘e- 
tion, evil purpose, 132, 23. 
uns_el]i«e, sh,, OM. unselh?^, WS. 
sailh'S,^; unhappiness, misfortune, 
29, 28. 

unseli, adj,, OM. unselig, WS. s^lig ; 

unhappy, unfortunate, 29, 27. 
uns§mly, adj., based on ON. sdemr; 

unfittmg, unseemly, »j2, 5. 
unshapi^nesse, (eMK.\ sh., as if OE. 
*unsceatJigness/. ; innocence', unn- 
sha])ipiesse (0), 12, 1, 
unshewed, pp. as adj,, ME. un + 
shewed; unshown, hidden, 231, 28. 
unstrung, adj., OE. unstrang- 
str<5ng; weak, infirm, 15, 14. 
untellendlice, adj., OE. *un- 
tellendllc V ; unspeakable, 3, 4. 
un]>ano, un])ank, sb,, OE. imiSanc ; 
ingratitude, disfleaswe; gs, here 


un])ankes, contrary to their pleasure, 
unwillingly, 6, 32 ; un]>anc his, 
t7'a7y to his wish, 62, 10, 
unISfau, sb., OE. un?Seaw ; bad 
viajtiiers, vice, 200, 21. 
untid, sb., OE. untid, adj., perh. sb. ; 

unseaso 7 iableness evil, 50, 24. 
untight, sb,, OE. *untyhl ? < tyhl, 
‘usage, right’ (?); evil, vice, 55, 

II. 

untill, prep., OE. un + til ; unto, 
Mztil, 163, 3. 

untrewe, adj,, OE. untreowe; nntrtte, 
awry, 16, 2. 

untwfame(n), wkv., eME. « Ml. 
untw|me(n) ; OE. untwieman ; 7iot 
to divide or be divided', pp. un- 
tw|met, undivided, 197, 11. 
unwar, adj., OE. unw’ser ; unaware, 
U 7 zprepared, 223, 23. 
unwarc, sb., OE. *unweorc ; idleness, 
evil', //. unwarces, 134, 10. 
unwelde, adj., OM. *nnwelde (welde) , 
WS. *unwielde, nngewielde; not 
subject to control, weak, wipoient, 
I5> 12- 

unweomnaet, adj., OE. unwemmed ; 

unspotted, ptire, 192, 16. 
unwilles, adv., OE. unwilles < un- 
will; agamst ozie's will; al hire 
unwilles, against her will, 192, 13. 
unwise, adv., OE. unwise ; unwisely, 
40, 21. 

unwityngly, adv., OE. unwitende + 
ly ; without knowledge, unwittmgly, 
238, 4 - 

unwraste, adv., OE, unwrseste; 

badly, wickedly, 187, 30. 
unwraste, unwrest, adj., O’E. un- 
wrSst ; infirm, weak, 54, 10 ; mis- 
erable, foul. Si, 22 ; evil, 199, 14. 
unwurti, adj., OE. unweor^ (wur'iS) ; 

not wo7'th, valueless, 193, 33. 
unwytyng, adj., OE. unwitende; 

unwittifig, unintentional, 236, 22, 
up, prep, adv., OE. up; up, upon, 
above, 2, 26; 29, 32; up snowe» 
according to, like snow, 102, 10. 
upbfrfr, sb., OE- up-i-ME. bfrfr, 
based on b|re(n), stv.; upbearer, 
supporter, 333, i. 



460 


GLOSSARY 


Tipbrayd, upbreyd, sb.j OE. iip + 
brsegd (br^d) ; ttpbraidingy up- 
brayd, 155, 22 ; upbreyd, 97, 7. 
upen, sse upon. 

upl^ndyscb, based on OE. 

uppeland (Ignd) ; up country^ 
rural^ 224, 23. 

upnime(n), j/z/., OE. upniman-nom 
(4) ; take up^ raise ; pU sg, upnom, 
43> 27- 

upon, upponn, upen, opon, prep, 
adv.f OE. up + on; upon, 30, 19; 
upponn (0), 9, 21 ; uppo = uppon, 
10, 5 ; opon, 71, 23 ; upen, accord- 
ing to, 116, 21. opon, 132, 20. 
Sth. uppen, 18 1, 14. 
uppard, see upward, 
uppen, uppo, sec upon, 
uprais, see uprise(n). 
upri5t, upryght, adj., OE. upriht; 

upright, 46, 15 ; upryght, 239, 12. 
uprise(n), stv., OE. uprisan-ras (i); 
uprise^ rise up\ inf. uprise, 137, 
23. ITth. pt. sg. uprais = upras, 
132, 25. 

uprisyng, pr. ppl. as sb. ; uprising. 
132, 24. 

upryght, see upri5t. 
upsterte(n), 'volev., OE. up + ON. 
sterta; upstart', pt. sg. upsterte, 
89, 23. 

upstey, see upstie(n). 
upstie(n), stv., ON. upstigan-ste (i) ; 
ascend, rise ; pt. sg. upstey = upste, 
132, 25. 

upst9nde(n), stv., OE. upstandan 
(st9ndan)-stod (6) ; stand up; hif. 
iipstpnde, in, 20. 

upward, uppard, adv., OE. upweard ; 

upward; uppard, 196, 22. 
ure, houre, sb., OF. hiire, ure ; hour, 
312, 19 ; houre, 239, 9. 
ure, ur, our, prn,, OE.^re (user) ; 
our , 4, 9 ; iir, 25, 12; oure, 66 , i ; 
ower, 38, 22. 
ure, see ic. 

urne(n'), stv., Sth. = Ml, Tinne(n); 
WS. iernan (yrnan)-om (3); run; 
pt. sg. om, 182, 15. 
us, uss, see io. 

usage, sb., OF. usage ; usage, 246, 6. 


use, sb., OF. use; use; pi. uses, 235, 
25. 

use(n), wkv., OF. user; usei inf. 
use, T20, 20. Sth. pr. pi. use]), 
223, iS; pp. yused, 234, 26. 
ut, on-^adv. prep., OE. fit ; out, 3, 
' 10 ; out, 51, 16. 

uteuine(n), stv., OE. utcuraan-com 
(cwom) (4) ; come oui ; pt. pi. 
utcomen, 33, i. 

ut^oute, adv., OE. ute; out, 6, 27; 
oute, 48, 4. 

uten, adv. prep., OE. Titan ; without, 
beyond, 32, 22. 

utg9(n), anv., OE. *utgan-eode; go 
out; pt. sg. utyede, 212, 3. 
uJSe, sb., Sth^ =! Ml. I])e ; OE. y‘S,/. ; 

wave; pi. utJen, 182, 17. 

USer, sb.. Uther {father of Arthut^ ; 

gs. TOeres, 190, 25. 
utnume, pp. as adj. adv., based on 
OE. niman ; exceptionally, 192, 9. 
utyede, uvele, see utg§(n), yvel. 
uvenan, adv., prep., OE. ufenan; 
upon, 189, 6. 

V. 

vseie, adj., Sth. - Ml. feie, faie; 

OE. f^ge; fated, doomed, 189, 19. 
vseir, vair, see fair. 

vseisiS, sb., Sth. - MI. fmislj) ; OE. 
f^ge + si‘(5 ; fated jou^-ney, death ; 
veeisi© make^e, make the fated 
journey, die, 184, 18. 
vair, vaire, see fair, faire. 

Valays, sb., NF. Valeis, OF. Valois; 
Valois, 158, 29. 

vale, sb., OF. valee ; valley, 166, 4. 
valeie, sb., OF. valee, AN, valeie ; 
valley, 20S, 17. 

Valentinianus, sb., Lat. Valen- 
tinianus; Valentinianus, 221, 14. 
valle(n), see falle(nj, 
vals, see fals. 

valsien, whj., Sth, =? Ml. falsen; 

OF, falser ; deceive, damage, injure ; 
pr. ppl. valsinde, 200, 30. 

valp, see falle(n)4 

vane< vaipe, sb., OF. veine; 7mn\ 
pi. vanys, 171, 23. 



GLOSSARY 


461 


vanite, see vanyte. 
vantwarde, OF. avantewarde 
(garde); vanguard, 20S, 15. 
vanyssh0(n), wkv., OF. *vanir, 
vaniss-, cf. vanouir ; vanish ; pr, 
I sgn vanysshe, 241, 3. 
vanyte, vanite, sh., OF, vanite; 

vanity, 121, 12 ; vanite, 128, 3. 
varen, see fare(n). 

Vaspasian, sb,^ Lat. Vespasianns ; 
Vespasian ; Vaspasian hys, Ves- 
pasian"' s, 220, 7. 
vaste, see faste, 

vayne, adj., OF. vain ; vain, 

136, 8. 

vayrhede, sh,, Kt. == Ml. fayrhgde ; 

OE. *fEcgeihgd,_/i ; beauty, 219, 4. 
veden, vel, see fede(n), falle(n). 
velaghe, see felawe. 
vela^rede, sb,, Kt. = Ml. felasrede ; 
ON. fclngi + ME. rede ; feitowship-, 
company, 219, 3. 
veld, velde, vele, see feld, ffle. 
ven^eaunce, vengeance, sb., OF. 
venjance ; vengeance, 103, 6 ; ven- 
geance, 135, 16. 

ven§e(n),?€'/(’z/., OF. vengci ; avenge] 
inf, venge, 167, 14. 
vfniel (vfnyal), adj\, OF. venial ; 
venial, 217, j6. 

venim,jr^., OF. venin ; venom, 17, 10. 
veol, veond, see faile(n), fend, 
veondlioh, adj,, StE. = Ml. fendlic; 
OE. feondllc; hostile, fendlihe, 
187, T. 

vgr, verde, vere, see fir, ferde, fere, 
vereden, see ferie(n). 

Vergilins, sb,, Lat, V ergilius ; Vergil, 
221, 5. 

verie(n), see ferie(n). 
vermyn, sb., OF. vermine ; vermin, 
244, 30. 

verraily, adv., OF. verai + ME. 1}^ ; 

verily, truly, 1 36, 4. 
verrament, adv., OF. veraiment; 

truly, verily, 109, 16. 
verre, verray, adj. adv,, OF. verai ; 
very, verily, 122, 21 j verray, 237, 

24- 

verst, ^ first, adj. 

vertfi, vertue, virtu, sb.^ OE. vertu ; 


virtue, favor, 64, 19; vertne, 146, 
12; pL virtues, 217, 17; vertns, 
144, 9. 

vestiment, sb.. Of . vestiment ,* vest- 
ment, 203, 7. 

vice, vyce, sb., OF. vice ; vice, defect, 
sin; pi. vices, 104, 7. 
vif, viis, vihte, viEte(n), see fif, vis, 
fiht, fi5te(n). 

vil, adj,, OF. vil; vile; pL vile, 
144, 6. 

vileynye, vyleynye, sb. , OF. vileinie ; 

villainy, 23S, 21 ; vyleynye, 219, 2. 
village, sb., OF. village ; village, 
239 > 25. 

viHiche, adv., OF. vil+Sth, liche; 

vilely, 204, 28. 

Vint, see finde(n), 
violence, sb., OF. violence ; violence, 
147, 16. ■ 

violent, adj., OF. violent; violent, 

345. 

virgin©, sb., OF. virgine ; virgin, ^4, 
15 - 

virtu, see vertu. 

vis, vyse, sb., OF, vis; jace, look; 

viis, 66, 8; vysc, 121, 14. 
visage, vy&ege, sb., OF, visage; 

visage, 240,^24; vysege, 98, 21. 
vision, visioun, sb., OF. vision, 
xVN* visiiin; vision, dreatn, 209, 
35 ; visioun, 232, 4. 
vittailler, ib., OF. vittailier; victu- 
alcr; pL vittaillers, 236, t. 
vlf(n), stv., Sth. = MI. flf(n) ; OE. 
nean-floh. (9) (6) ; flay ; pp. vla^e, 
217, 30. 

vldd(e), see flod. 

vlygp, viyinde, see fiege(n). 

vo5el, see fdgeL 

voice, sb., OF\ vois; voice, J05, i2. 
vole, see folk. 

volewen, vol^i, vol5ep, see fol5e(n). 
volk, see folk. 

volliche, adv., Sth. !=ML fullike (li) ; 

OE. fuUlce ; fully, 218, j. 
vor, see for. 

vorarnie(n), wku., StE. = Ml. for- 
atne(n) ; OE. *foramian ; ride hard, 
weaiy by riding ; voramed, 208, 

^ 7 - 



462 


GLOSSARY 


vorl)ede(n), see forbede( 3 i). 
vorberne(ii), wMv,, Sth. = Ml. for- 
beme(n) ; OE. forbeman ; dum up ; 
pr* 3 vorbem)), 218, ir. 
vorbisne, sb.^ Sth. = Ml. forbisne ; 
OE, forblsn, f. ; example^ parable, 
199, 19. 

vore, sb., Sth. « Ml. fore ; OE. for, 
y. ; journey^ expedition, 185, ii. 
vorewarde, vorwarde, see fore- 
warde. 

vorl9re, see forlesen. 
vorl§renesse, sb.^ Sth. = ML for- 
lorennesse; OE. forlorenuess, y.; 
lost condition, 198, 15. 
vorprikie(ii), wJw., Sth. s= Ml. for- 
prik:e(n) ; OE. for + prician ; spur, 
violently ; pp, vorpriked, 208, 27. 
vorsal:e(n), see forsake(n). 
vorsTrolnwe(n), stv», Sth. *= Ml. 
forswelwe(n) (swolwe(n)) ; OE. 
forswelgan-swealg (3) • swallow 
up, devour ; pr. 3 s^. vorswoluweS, 
198, 35. 

vorswgre, see forsw§re( 3 i). 
vort(e;, prep, conj., Sth. = Ml. fort ; 
OE. for to ; ufUil, 197, 15 ; vorte, 
206, 30. 
vortJ, see for]?. 

vorjjenchiuge, sb,, Sth. =* Ml. foi- 
])enchinge ; OE. ’’'forOeacung ? ; 
repentance, 218, i. 
vorpi, see forpi. 
vorwarde, see forewarde. 
vorw6undie(n), %vkv., Sth. = Ml. 
foi*wunde(n) ; OE. forwundian 
(wundian) ; wound badly • pp, 
vorwounded, 20S, 27. 
voryetep, voryet, see for5ete(n). 
vorzope, see forsdpe. 
vouche(n), wko., OE, voucher ; 
vouch, vow ; with safe, • save, to 
grant ; pr, 1 sg, I voiiche it save, / 
^ant it, 138, 8. 
v^, see ful. . 

voulhede, sb., Kt. ~ ML foulhgde ; 1 
OE. ful-j-Kt. XikdA', foulness, 219, 
12. 

voW^e, sb,, OF, vou; vow, 107, 27. 
vram, Vridei, see fram, Pjadai. 
vjdliohe, adv,, Kt. =» ML frely; OE 


frilice (freollce) ; freely, nobly, 
willingly, 215, 4. 

vTom, vTovreu, see fram, fr6f!re(n). 
vyce, vyend, see vice, fend, 
vyleynye, see vileynye. 
vyse, vyseie, see vis, vise^e. 


W. 

wa, sb., eMB. ITth. =M 1 . w§ ; OE. 

wa ; woe, 79, 4. Cf. wawe. 
wade(ii), wayd, wkv., OE, wadan, 
infl. by ON. vaffa; go, wade ; INth, 
iff. wayd = wad, 166, 19. 
wading, sb., OE. wadung, infl. by 
ON. vatJa ; wading, 168, 2. 
web, sb., OAng. wse, WS. wa ; woe, 
sorrow, 186, 19. 
wsei, wsel, see wei, wel. 
w®lde(n), see wflde(n). 
w®ron, (-en), see be(n). 
w»rse, w®s, see werse, (ben). 
w®t, w®x, see who, waxe(n). 
wafer§re, sb., OF. wafre, *wafrier ; 
seller of wafers, confectioner, 237, 

23. 

wafullic, adv., Nth. = Ml, wgfulli ; 
based on OE, wa; woefully, 153, 
14, 

•waie, see wei. 

wain, wayn, sb., OE. wsegii ; wain, 
wagon, 31, 10; wayn, 59, 1. 
wait0(n), 2uhv., OF. waiter ; watch, 
wait, heed', inf. waiten, 80, 19, 
Nth. inf, wait, watch to injure, 
injttre, 159, 16. Sth. pt. pi, wey- 
tede, 223, 20. 

waadur, sb,, OF. wagenre, gageure; 
wager, 89, 18. 

wake(n), wkv., OE. wacian ; wake, 
watch ; inf. waken, 34, 2 ; wake, 
56, 27 ; pr. 3 sg. wakety, 15, 5 ; pp. 
waked, 34, 22. Nth. pr. 3 sg. 
wakes, 145, 6 ; pr. ppl. wakand, 
i54>29. • 

wake(n), stv., OE. wacan-woc (6) ; 

. wake, awake*, inf. wake, 74, 3; 

pt. sg. woe, 23, 15. 
wakie(n), wkv., OE. wacian ; weaken, 
fail’, Sth. inf 183, 14. 



GLOSSARY 


463 


wakiie(n), wJkf,) OE. wacian; wa^£n; 
Wth. pi waknyt, 172, 30. Sth. 
PP* ywak^ned, ie bom^ 66, 16. 
wal, sh.y OM. wall, WS, weall ; wall^ 
122, 30. Sth. ds, walle, 177, 17. 
walaw9, inicrj., OE. wa la wa ; 
alas, 48, 9. 

wald, sb,, eME. ISTth. for Ml. wgld ; 
OM. wald, wald, WS. weald, w«. ; 
power*, ds. walde, ii, 27. 

wald, walde, see wille. 
walde(n), stv,, eME. 5s Ml. wglden ; 

OM. waldan (waldan), WS. wealdan 
-weold (H) ; wield, have power 
ever', walden, 183, 7. 
waldend, sb., OM. waldend, WS. 
wealdend; ruler, governor, 184, 21. 

wale, inierj,, OE. wala ; woe, alas, 
182, 27. 

Wales, sb,, OE. Wealas < Wealh ; 
Wales, 222, 20. 

Walingford, sb», OE. Wealenga-fordj 
Wallingford (I'erkshire), 6 , 30. 
walke(n), siv., OE. walcan (wealcan) 
-weolc (R) ; walk, earlier roll, toss ; 
pr. I sg, walke, 240, 32 ; pr, 3 sg. 
walked, 17, 9 »* pf\ pL walkcn, 123, 
32 ; pU shj, sg* walked, 240, 26. 
islilx. pr, pi, walkes, 150, 6. 
walle, see wal. 

walle(n), stv., OM. wallan (WS. 
weallan)-weol (^R) ; boil, well up; 
pL sg, wel, 62, 16. Sth. pr, ppl, 
wallinde, 195, 18; pL sbj\ sg, 
weolle, 195, 16. 

walm, ae^\, OE, *wealin, cf. OM. 
welm, WS. wielm ; welling, boil- 
I 9 .n> ^* 5 * 

Walri, sb,, OF. Waleri (Wace), Va- 
lerie; Walry, (St. Valerie), 205, 13. 
Walsolunan, sb., OM, Welisc, WS, 
WielisQ + man; Welshman; pL 
Walschmen, 224, 4. 
walspfre, sb , OE. wgelspere ; battle- 
spear, 190, 9* 

Walter, sh, OF. Waltere, Teut, Wald- 
here; Walter; Wallterr, Omis 
brother, 8, 13 ; Walter, 227, i. 
Waltevile, sb,, Waliville, Hugo of, 
* 4s, ,23 7 William de, 8, 2. 

WatHiMa, sb., OM. *Waltmam, WS. 


*Weal?Sliam ; Waltha7?t in JSssex, 
210, I. 

Walwaine, Walwain, sb., OF. W'al- 
wain, Gawain ; Walwain, 181, 17. 
Nth. Wawan, 126, 13. 
waanbe, sb,, eME. «« Ml. wpmb 
(womb) ; OE. wamb, wamb, f , ; 
stoinach, womb, 180, 25, Cf. 

wpmbe. 

wan, see winn©(ii), whanne. 
wandrfme = wandrfm, sb,, OE. 
wan + dream ; lack of Joy, trouble, 
distress, loS, 23. 

wandrf J), sb,, ON. vandrsB'Si ; misery, 
trouble, 148, 8. 

wane, sb,, ON. van, f,, * hope, ex- 
pectation ’ ; hope, store, quantity or 
number, 164, 25. INth. wayn, 
166, 2. 

wane, adj., OE. wana; wanting, 
lacking, 1 1 7, 25. 
wanne, see whanne. 
wante(n), wkv., ON. vanta; want, 
be lacking; pr. sbj. sg. wante, 27, 
20 ; pt. sg. wantede, 24, 27. 
war, war(e), see bo(n), whdr. 
war, adJ,, OE. wmr ; aware, wary, 
on guard, 5, 13. Nth. war, 155, 6. 
ware, see werk. 
ward, see wurpen. 

ward, adv., OM. ward, WS. weard; 
toward ; to Gode ward, toward God, 
16, 31 ; 17, 9. 

warde, ward, sh., OM, ward, WS. 
weaid,yi ; custody, keeping, 67, 28 ; 
warde, charge, maturity, 121, 27. 

ware, so., OE. warn ; goods, Voares, 
merchandise, 178, 12. 

ware, see be(n). 

ware(n), warian ; beware, 

take precdumn, defend; Nth. pr. 
sbj, sg. wari^e, 128, 12; imp. pi., 
war, 160, 20. Sth. irf. wEnen, 
202, 32. , 
wS-ren, see be(n). 

ware(n), wkv., OE, *warian ; spend; 

irf, wire, 95, 26, 
war^se, see whersp. 
waresdiin, sb., AN. warjsun, OF. 
warison; protection, treasure, 105, 
2 $. 



464 


GLOSSARY 


warevgre, see wherfgre. 

Ware-wlk, sb,^ OE. W^ringwlc; 
Warwick, 227, 5. 

wari, sb., OE. wearg, werig; felon, 
villain ; Sth. pi, warlen, 184, 26. 
■warien, see ware(n). 
warie(ii), wkv,, OE. wergian ; curse, 
condefim ; inf. warien, 200, 16 ; pr. 
sbj, sg. wane, 78, 4 ; pp. waned, 78, 
5. irth.,//. waryit, 173, 16. 
warlau, sb., OE. *WKrloga j sorcerer, 
traitor, devil ; pL warlaus, 135, iS. 
warld, see werld. 

warm, adj , , OE. wearm, warm ; v/ar/n ; 
warme, 89, 4. 

warme(n), wkv., OM. warmian, WS. 
wearmian ; war/n ; pr. pi, warmen, 
20,9. 

wamden, see W6rne(n). 
warne(n),z£'/’z/.,OE. wearnian; warn, 
guard \ inf. wame, 122, 13; pp. 
w-amed, 54, 21 j pt. sg, waniede, 

1S9. s. 

warp, see werpe(ii\ 
warpe(ii), wkv., ON. varpa; throw, 
inf warpen, 195, 15. 
warraying, see werrie(ii). 
warre, see ware(n), 
wars80, see wliersg. 
wart, warth, warrj), see wur]?e(ii). 
warjjoru, see wher}>oru. 
waryit, see warie(n). 
waslie(n), 'wasse(n)) siv., OE. was- 
can-wosc (6, R) ; wash; z///Cwasshe, 
1 01, 28 ; wassen, 29, 3 ; wasse, 59, 
22 ; pt, sg. weis, 29, I ; pi. pL 
wyschen, 109, 5, Nth. inf, was, 
132, 12. 

was(s), see be(n). 

W&st, adj., Oi" . wast ; waste, empty, 
171, I. 

wastep, wh)., OF. wasler; waste*. 
Nth. i)if. wast, 134, 10, 
wat, wat, see who, wite(n). 
water, wattir, sb., OE. wgeter : water, 
stream, 19, 2; wattir, i 65 , 5; pi, 
waters, 100, 19. Sth. weter, 195, 
18; ds. wetere, 178, 26; wettre, 
196, 31. 

waterkinn, sb., OE. woeter + cynn j 
kin by water, i,e. baptism, ii, 22, 


watloker, see whatliche. 
wattir, see water. 

wav0re(n), wkv., ON. vafra; waver, 
loiter*, Nth.y>r.7&/>/. waverand, 169, 
26 ; pt. sg. waveryt, 167, 20. 

waw, sb., OE. wag; wall*, ds. wawe, 
79 » 13 * 

Wawam, see Walwaine. 
wawe, d)., OE. wawa ; woe, miseiy, 
iSo, 29 ; pi. wawenn (O), 12, 16. 

wax, sb., OE. weax; wax, 117, 6 . 
waxe(n), stv., OE. weaxan-wox and 

wex (6, R ) ; wax, grow, increase ; 
inf waxen, 193, 12; pr. 3 sg. 
waxetS, 17, 17; pr. shj. sg. wax, 
ic>3j 5 ; P^‘ PP^' waxanci, 103, 29 ; 
pt. jr^.WEex (eME,), 5, iS ; wex, 24, 
29; wax, 92, 13 ; pi.pl. wexen, 23, 
8 ; pp. waxen, 21, 24. 

way, waye, see wei. 
wayd, see wade(n). 

waym, we, see wane, wain, ic. 
wg, inteij., OE. wk, cogn. with ON. 

wei ; woe, 66, 9. 
wfalde(n), sec wflde(n). 
wechdede, sb., OM. wsecce (*wecce) 
+ dede; watching, vigil, f 4, 13. 
weche, sb., OE. waecche, f ; watch, 
vigil, 34, 20. 

wed, sb., OE. wedd ; pledge, surety ; 
to wedde,/^r security, for a pledge, 
26, 6. 

wedd0(n), wkv., OE. weddian ; wed, 
pledge*, pt. sg. wecldyd, 116, 1. 
eSth. iweddet) 194, i. 
weddir, sb., OE. wefe; wether, 
sheep, 169, 29. 

wede, sb., OM. wede, WS. waide ; 
clothing, zveeds*, pi. weden, 31, 17; 
wedes, 48, 21. 

Wedenysday, see Wodnesdei. 
weder, weddir, sb,, OE. weder ; 
storm, weather, 19, 28; gs. wederes, 
i8s, 6 . 

weder, wedir, wheder, and com- 
pounds, see whejjer. 
wedl&o, =» Ml. wcdlgk ; OE. 

wedlacj wedlock, 1 92, 19. 

wee, weel, see whf, wSL 

wff, sb., OE. w^an (?) ; whiff, breath, 

■ 5^9 



GLOSSARY 


46s 


we5e(n), OE. wegan-wseg (5) ; 

weighs estimate ; inf. wejen, 178, 7, 
weghte, OE. gewiht, gewihte; 
weight, 147, 15. 

wei, way, weie, sb., OE. wegj way', 
ds. weie, 14, 3; waie, loo, 24; 
waye, 65, 22 ; weise, 52, 13; wsei 
(eME.), 1 86, 16 ; adv. gs. waiys, 
136, 18; wayis, 167, 15; weies, 178, 
16; weis, 193, 27. 

weilawei, interj., ON. vei + la + vei, 
cognate wth OE. wa la wa ; woe, 
alas, 22, 24. 

weile, intcTj., ON. vei + OE. la; woe, 
48, 9. 

weiX(l), weint, see wel, wende(n). 

weir, see be(n). 

weis, see wei, waslie(n). 

wel, weal, weie, well, adv., OE. wel 
(wel) ; well, truly, very; w8, i, 3 ; 
wSl, 4, 17 ; well, 9, 17 ; weile, 14, 
14; weie, 70, 2; weel, 239, 7; 
swi??e wel, vc 9 y often, 192,8. INth. 
well, 167, 27; weill, io8, 12; weyl, 
89, 7. 

wel, see walle(n). 
welcome, see wiloume. 
welde(n), wkv<., OM. weldan, weldan, 
WS. wieidan ; rule over, wield, 
rule ; inf welden, 24, 15; welde, 
121, 28; welden, obtain, 193, 29; 

3 sg* weldeC, 192, i. 
wf Ide(n), stv., Sth. Ml. welden ; 
\\‘S, wealdan (wfaldan)-weold (R); 
wield, have power over; eME. inf 
wfalden, 177, 31 ; pr. 1 sg. waelde, 
176,3. 

wfle, sb., OE. weie ; weal, happiness, 
63, 2. eSth.//. weolen, 193,12. 
wSle, see wel. 

welked,//, as adj., cf. MDn. welken, 

* to wither* ; withered, 241, 9 ; pL 
welkede, 23, ii. 
well, Welle, see wel. 
well©, sb., OM. Welle, WS. wiclle,/.; 
well, 15,17. 

well©gr 1 ind,^ 3 ., OM. well,/'. + grund; 

bottom of a well, 15, 29. 
wel 5 ©, OE. ’•'wel^,^; wealth, 31, 
22. 

wen, see wliaaxn©. 

H 


wen, wend(e), sec wene(n). 
wenden, wkv., OE, wendan, wendan ; 
turn, wend, go ; inf wenden, 14, 3 ; 
wende, 70, 30; wend, IT4, 19; p?. 
sbf sg. wende, 17S, 30; pt. sg. 
wende, 4, 26 ; pt. pL wenden, 6, 31 ; 
wenten, 69, 2 ; pp. wennd (O), 8, 
19 ; went, 26, 9. NTth. imp. pi. 
wendis, 139, 13. Sth. pr. 3 sg. 
weint -< wende^^, 196, 16 ; went, 
215, 9;//* y went, 3 i 5 > 9 - 
wendinge, sb., OE, wendung, wen- 
dung, y.; wending, turning, jour- 
ney, 215,7. 

w§ne, sb., OE. wen, f. wena, m . ; 
thought, hope, expectation, 42, 

13* 

w§ne(n), wkv., OE. wenan j think, 
ween ; pr. 2 sg. wenest, 50, 7 ; pr. 3 
4^. weneti, 177, 17; wenen, 

20, 2 ; imp. sg. wen» 193, 2^;pt.sg. 
wende, 7, 2 ; pt.pl. wenden, 2, 19. 
mt'h.pr. 2 sg. wenis, 128, 9 ; pr. 3 
sg. wenes, 83, ii; pt* pi. wend, 
155> 10. 

weng, W3nag, sb., ON. vengr ; wing ; 

pL wcnges, 145, 5 ; wynges, 144, i. 
Wenliever, sb., OF. Wenhaver ; Wen~ 
haver e, Guenevere, 1 81, 22 ; ds. 
Wenhaveren, 185, 10. 
weolcne, sh., OE. wolcne, f; sky, 
welkin, 1 82, 51. 
weolde, see wille(n). 
weole, weolen, see wfle. 
weolle, see walle(n), 
weopmon, sb., eSth.. = Ml. wepmaii; 
OM. wepman, WS. w«pman ; man, 
male, 199, 8. 

weorcli, weorde, see werk, word, 
wf ore, wforen, see be(n). 
weork, see werk. 

weorldmon, sb., OE. weoroldmann 
(mgnn) ; mart upon earth, man 
of affairs', ds. weorldmonne, 183, 

15. 

weoire, adj. comp., ON. verri ; worse, 
200, 30. 

wep, sb., OE. *wep?, beside w 5 p; 

weeping, 30, 8 ; ds. wepe, 93, 15. 
wepe(n), stv., OE. wepan-weop (R) ; 
weep; inf wepe, 56, 9; pr. ppL 

h 



466 


GLOSSARY 


wepinge, 38, 14; wepeand, 64, 16; 
ft, s^, wep, 57, 16; wep§, 67, 9; 
wopj 7 o> 31 ; P- wepen, 37, 32 ; 
wopen, 70, 28. Sth. fr, pi, wepep, 
3I5> 15- 

wepen, wepen, s^., OM. wepn, wepen, 
WS. w^pen; weapon', wepne, 79, 
29, Sth. pL wgpnen, 184, 31. 
wer, w|r, see be(n). 
war, wfr, see wlier. 
wer, see werre. 

war, were, sh,, OE. wer ; man, hus- 
band', ds, were, 177, 7; were, 
194, 6. 

were, see werk. 

ward, sb.y Nth. == Ml. werld ; OE. 

werold; world, 129, 9. 
werdly, adj,. Nth. = Ml. werldll; 

OE. weoroldllc ; worldly, 146, 19. 
were, adj., ON. verri, cogn. with 
OM. wersa, WS. wiersa ; worse, 
128, 18. 

wgre, were, see he(n), werre, wher. 
wgre, sb., origin unknown ; doubt, 
92, 3. INth. weyr (cf. Scotch 
weir), 173, 7. 
weref^re, see wherefgre. 
wfre(n), wkv., OE. werian; defend, 
protect, keep off, drive away, go 
away, wear', inf. wfren, 17, 20. 
Sth. inf, wfrien, 226, 12. 
wfre(n), wkv., OE. werian; wear-, 
inf w|re, 61, pr, 3 sg, w§re?J, 
16, 20. 

wfren, see be(n). 
weri, see wery. 

werk, eME. weork, sb., OE. weorc, 
n, ', work ; werre (O), 8, 24 ; pi. 
weorkes (eME,), 4, 26 ; werkes, 
103, 18; werkys, 109, 25; werke, 
105, 14. Nth. ware, 129, 30 ; pL 
werks, 152, 4; eSth. ds. weorche, 
176, 1 1. 

werkmau, sh., OE. weoreman ; %vork- 
mani pi. werkmen, 212, 3. 
werld, werlde, world, warld, sb., 
OE. weorold,^ ; world, age, eternity', 
werlde, J 7, i ,' werld, 18, 3 ; world, 
56, 3. Kt. wordle, 211, 24; pi. 
wordles, 213, 31. 

weme(n), OM. *weinan, WS. 


wieman ; refuse, deny ; pt, pi. 
wemeden, 26, 15 ; wamden, 187, 8. 
wer on, see ben. 

werpe(n), stv., OE. weoipan-wearp 
(3); cast, throw', pt. sg. warp, 

werrais, werre, see weme(n), werk. 
werre, sb., OF. werre, guerre ; war, 
5, 18. Nth. wer, 149, 31; wgre, 
I57» 22 ; pi. wers, 149, 29. 
werrie(n), werre(n), wkv., OF, 
werreier; make war on', inf wer- 
rien, 2, 15 ; werre, 221, ; pt. S£. 

werrede, werred, 223, 31. Nth. 
pr. 3 sg, werrais, 127, 14. 
werridur, sb., OF. werre or ; warrior, 
223, 26. 

wers, see werre. 

werse, wers, adj., comp, to ivel ; 
OM. werse, WS. wierse (wyrse) ; 
worse, 3, 22 ; wzerse, 5, 20 ; superl. 
worste, 242, 13. Nth, wers, 127, 
20. Sth. wiirse, 190, i. 
wersie(n), wkv., Kt. - Ml. werse(n), 
wurse(n) ; OE. wyrsian ; make 
worse ', pp, iwersed, 226, 17. 
werpe, see wurpe(n), be(n). 
wery, weri, adj., OE. werig ; weary, 
161, 9; weri, 182, 21. 

wes, westen, see be(n), wite(n). 
west, OE. west; west, 222, 6. 
Westmynstre, sb., OE. Westmynster ; 

West7Hmster, 236, 27, 
wet = whet, see who. 

wet, adj., OM. wet, WS. wSt; wet, 
28, 32. Sth. w|t, 1S2, 21. 

wete (wfte), sb., OM. wete, WS. 

wxte,f. ; 7noisture, wader, 15, 28. 
weter(e), wettre, see water. 
wexe(n), wey^e, see waxe(n), wei. 
weyl, see wel. 

weyr, weyten, see wfre, waite(n). 
W3- words, see wh- forms, 
wh^ rel. pr?t., eME. Nth. s= MI. 
who ; OE. hwa ; who ; Nth, da. 
whaym, 145, 23. eSth. hwam, 
J94, 7; dpi. hwan, 179, 6. Cf* 
who. 

whset, see who. 

whanne, wanne, whan, wan, 
whenne, adv. conj., OE. hwanne ; 



GLOSSARY 


467 


w/ien ; wanne, 14, S ; quan, 34, S ; 
quane, 31, 27 ; whan, 45, 19 ; wan, 
48, 5 ; hwan, 75, 20 ; whenne, 119, 
7 ; when, 47, 16 ; 5 wanne, 55, ii ; 
qwan, 1 1 7, 25 ; wen, 128,9; hwenne, 
177, n. eSth. hwon, 197, 20. 
ISTth. quen, 128, 20; quhen, 168,4. 
whar, whare, and compounds, see 
wher, and compounds, 
whareby, (Tiiv , OE. hw^r + bl, 
w/ieredjf, 119, 9. 
wharefgre, see wherfgre. 
wharto, adv., OE. hwiSr, hw^ + to ; 
•viheretOj 141, 35. 

whase, indef, pm., eME., ITfeh. for 
whose ; OE. Jivva swd, hwa swa: ; 
wAoso, whosocz'er, 9, 14. 
wbaswa, see whosg. 
wbat, wat, see wiio. 
whalSor, see whej^er. 
whatliche, adv., OE. hwmtHce ; 
swiftly^ (jztickly ; covip. Avatloker, 
viore especially, 204, 1 3. 
whaym, see wha, 

whoderward, adv., OE. hwae?yer + 
weard; whitherwat'd, 99, 18; 

whydyrward, 96, 14. 
whenne, when, see whanne. 
whens, adv., OE. hwgnan + es; 
whence, 106, 37, 

wher, where, whare, were, adv. 
conj., OM. hwer, hwar, WS. hw^r ; 
where I jwere, 48, 17 ; were, 52, 13; 
whare, 36, 21 ; ware, 131, ii ; whar, 
182,9; wfr, 306, 13; whgre, 135,6. 
Kt. hwer, 218, 14. 

whfreas, adv., Sth. « Ml. wheras; 
WS. hwalT + ME. as; whereas, 
where, 337, 10. 

wherf§re, wharefore, hwerfore, 
adv., OM. hwerfore, WS. hwSrforc ; 
wherefore-, whargfgre, J19, i6. 

ITth. qiiarf§r, 155, 9. eSth, hwer- 
fore, 193, 11; warevgre, 209, 31. 
Kt. were%e, 213, 9. 
whSrof, adv., OM, hwer (WS. hw0e^^ 
■+ of ; whereof, 202, 4. 
whersg, adv., OM. hwerswa, WS. 
hw^swa ; whereso, wheresoever ; 
warsse (eME.), 4, 6; warese, 7, 4. 
wh§r]?oru, adv., OM, hwer (WS. 


hw^r) +]?arh ; wherethrough ; ITth. 
quarforn, 156, 3 ; quharthrou, 169, 
3. Sth. warj^oru, 208, 30; \vh|r- 
{ur5, 226, 16. 

whfr]?ur5 (-thonrgh), wher]?oru. 

whfte, r^., OE. hw^te; wheat, 15S, 

4- 

wh6]?er, whethir, pm., adv., OE. 
hwje])er; whether-, wedir, 52, 17; 
5wider, 60, 2; whethir, 137, 31;. 
whatJer, 1S8, 30 ; whether, which of 
two, 234, 19. ITth. quednr, 327, 
26; quehej)ir, 169, 32 ; wydur, 128, 
14; whetiiir, 137, 31. 

whelJersf, adv., OE. hwas^Jer + see ; 
whetlm'SQ, 200, 7. 

wM, why, adv., OE. hw^; why, 10, 
1 1 ; W5y, 48, 1 1 ; 5wl, 48, 19. Wth. 
W3:55 j 9- Sth. wi, 179, 15. Kt. 
wee, 212, 8. 

while, wile, which, indef. interrog., 
later rcLpm., OE., hwilc; which ; 
wile, 14, 3 ; quilke, 30, 30; shwilk, 
54, 3 ; whichg, 73, 7 ; which, loi, 
21 ; whych, 88, 3 ; pB which, 104, 
17; qwyche, 118, 6. l^’th. quilk, 
130, 32 ; Je whilke, 145, 14; wylke, 
144, 22. Sth. ds. whilche, 180, 
10; hwiicche, 195, 13 I wuch, 203, 
21. 

whilche, see while. 

while, wile, adv., OE. hwil ; while ; 
wile, 3, 22 ; qiille, 21.5; W5lle, 53, 
28; 5wile, 59, 8. IJ^th. quil, 156, 
6 ; qnhill, 170, 27. Sth, wide, 206, 
20. 

whilem, whilen, whilum, whilom, 
adv., OE. hwilum < hwil ; whiles, 
once\ qiiilum, 26, 13; hwUen, 19 1, 
6; hwilem, 213, 29; whilom, 237, 
7. ETth. qiiilum, 128, 23. 

whilhe, see while. 

while, adv., based on whil ; whiles, 

whit, whyt, adj., OE. hwit ; white ; 
whyte, 102, 9; pi. white, 228, 
16. 

Whitsgnd, sh., OE. Hwitsand ? 
Wissant (near Calais), 185, 3. 

wh5, indef., inter., later rel. pm.-, 
OE. hwa; who-, ho, 37, 6; 3w5, 


H h 2 



468 


GLOSSARY 


50, 4; qwo, I17, 29 j da. whom, 
94, 23. IS’tli. qua, 128, 31 ; quha, 
166, 18 ; da. quam, 29, 32 ; 126, 10. 
Sti. hwq, 197, 19; wq, 207, 19; 
neut.vizXi 4, 28; what, 35, 13; 5wat, 
49, 22. irtlL. quat, 127, 16; qwat, 
118, 3. Sth. wet, 176, 23; whet, 

179. l; liwet. 194.6- 

■whomsg, see whosg. 
wh§re, see wher* 

whosg, indef. OE. hwaswa; 

whoso ; wu^wa (eMK), 2, 5 ; 
wosg, 20, 18 ,* qwosg, 117, 5. ITtii. 
quasa, 1 29, 1 3. Sth. wh^wa (eSth.), 
189, 13 ; da. whgmsg, 233, 28. 
why eh, see which, 
whydyrward, see whederward. 
whyt, wi, see whit, whi. 
wiaxe, wiax, sh., OE. wig + eax, 
/.; battle-ax^ 181, 19. 
wicehe, sb.^ OE. wicche, /. ; witch ; 

. //. wicches, 20, 14. 
wicci, wloke, see wikke. 
wicht, adj\y OE, ’^'wiht, adj.^ cf. 
MLG. wicht; brave ^ valiant^ 75, 
6 . 

wicked, wikked, ad;\, based on ME. 
wicke; wicked^ evil, 100,15 ; wykked, 
88, 2. 

wickedness, wikkednesse, based 

on wikke, q.v.; wickedness, loi, 28; 
wikkednesse, 246, 3. K'th. wiknes, 

153. 8- 

wid, widuten, see wip, wi]?ut0n. 
wide, adu., OE. wide ; wide, widely, 

19,8. 

wif, sh., OE. wif ; wife ; wiif, 65, 6 ; 
ds. in phr. t 5 wife (wive), 7, 2 ; 
wyef?, 147, 27 ; pL wives ; wyve 
(in rime), 59, 17 ; so ns, wyve for 
wyf, 121, 22 ; wive, 1S8, 27. Sth. 
ds. wife, 176, 24. 
wi^t, see wiht. 

wigt, wyght, sb., OE. wiht [wegan] ; 

weight, 42, 12; wyghte, 117,8. 
wiht, wigt, sb,, OE. wiht; person, 
wight, creature', wihht (O), 12, 26; 
wist, 36, 3; pi. wihte, 178, 22. 
wiis, wike, see wis, wikke. 
wike, wyke, sh., OE, ysriocu ; week, 
200, 1 ; wyke, 107, 1 1, Cf, woke. 


wiken, sb., OE. wice, isf; office, 
duty, charges', wikenn (O), 9, 19. 
wikke, wike, wyk, adj., based on 
OE. wican (?) ; wicked, evil; wicci, 
6, iS; wikke, tmpleasant, 51, 28; 
wdke, 77, 28; wicke, 85, 13; wyk, 
88, 20. Ifth. pi. wike, 153, 5. 
Cf. wicked. 

wikkedehfd, sh,, based on wikke, 
q.v.; wickedness, 50, 24. 
wiknes, wikkednesse, see wicked- 
nes. 

wil, wyl, sh., OK will; pleasure, 
will, 20, 13 ; wyl, 117, 14. 
wile, see while. 

wileume, welcome, ac^'. < sb., OE. 
wilcuma, later infl. by wel (wel) ; 
welcome, 181, 3; welcome, 114, 


24. 

wilde, adj,, OE. wilde, wilde ; wild, 
48, 12. 

wilde (wile), see wille(n). 

wile, see while. 

wiles, adv., OE. hwile + es; whiles, 
while, 16, 20. 

wilfull, adj,, OE. ^wilfull, cf. wil- 
fullice ; voluntary, wilful, 147, 9. 

will, adj., ON. villr, cogn. with OE. 
wild ; wild, bewildered, despairing, 
166, 2. 

will, see wille(n). 

Wiliam, see Willelm. 

wille, wylle, sh,, OE. willa; 7t/ill, 
desire, wish, 8, 18 ; wylle, 89, 33 ; 
after wille, according to desire, 205, 
16; pi. wyllis, 219, 31. 

wille, adv., ON. willr, adj., cogn. with 
OE. wilde, ‘'wild'; wildly, wrongly, 


15, 1' 

wille (n), wile, wole, anv., OE. wille- 
wolde ; wish, will; inf, wilenn (O), 
31 7^''* I, 3 sg^ wile, 10, 11 ; 
wille, 14, 7; wole, iio, 16; dlle, 
203, '21; w 61,242,3I ; wyll, 106,20; 
pr. 2 sg, wylte, iii, 15 ; wolt, 204, 
17; willes, 195, a; pr, //. willen, 
4, 28 ; wilen, 29, 16 ; wylle, 88, 8 ; 
wol we, 24a, 18 ; pt. sg. wolde, i, 2 ; 
wollde (O), 8, 22; wulde, 10, 13; 
w 51 de, 36, I ; w 5 ld, 68, 12 ; wold, 
71, 5 ; wilde; 75, 16 ; pi, 2 sg. 



GLOSSARY 


469 


mildes, 19, 3; woldest, 38, 10; 
woldyst, III, 2$. mil. sbj\ 
sg, will, 141, 29; p,J>l, wald, 126, 
16 ; wold, 13S, II ; wk. wilde, 75, 
16. Sth. pr. I, 3 sg, wiile, 177, 
15; iille, 193, 2; pr, 2 sg, willt, 
192? 33; wiille^J, 177, lo; 

wiile]), 2 1 1, 28; pU sg, weolde 
(eSth.), 1S7, iS; walde, 192, 12. 
mg. forms ; pr. i, 3 sg. nelle < 
nille < ne wiile, 45, 26 ; nele, 180, 
I ; pt.i sg, n oldest, 38, 7 ; sg. 
nalde, 192, 20. St/h. pr. i, 3 sg 
niil, 192, 32 ; pr, 3 sg. niilt, 193, 2. 
Kt. pr, I, 3 sg. nele, 216, 7. 

Willeim, William, Wiliam, sb.^ NF. 
Willelm; WiUiani\ SanctWillelm, 
WillimiqfNor'wich, 5,4; William, 
15; Willyams, 117, 3; 
Wiliam, 303, 22. 

willesfol, adj., OE. willa, »/., will, 
nmt, + fal ; tvilfui, headstrong, 
206, 3. 

William, see Wellelm. 

wilme(ii), wkv., Sth. = Ml. wilne(n) ; 
OE, wilnian ; dcsh'C, wish for\ inf. 
wiluin (Ml. ?), 193, 28 ; wylm, 217, 
14; imp.pl. wilnie 5e, 199, 5; pr. 
sbj. pL wilnen, 202, ii ; pt, pi, 
wylnede, 216, 18 ; pp, iwilnet, 195, 
36. 

wimman, wummon, womman, sb., 
OE, wlfman, wimman ; woman, 7, 
6; wymman, 53, 19; wnmmon, 
194, 16; pi. wimmen, 3, 3; 

wymmen, 220, 16; wummen, 203, 
18; women, 235, 8; gpl. wym- 
mones, 131, 5, mh. womman, 
133, 7 ; pl> womene, 144, 33. Sth. 

wimmonen, 181, 22 ; wimmonne, 
188, 19; wyfman, a 18, 6. 

win, sb., OE. winn ; labor, contention, 
strife, 1%, 27; ds, winne, gxin, 
acquisition, 5. 

win, wfn, sb., OE.' win < Lat vinum; 
wine, 22, 3 j wyn, 53, 8. 

Winohestre, -chfiestre, -castre, sb,, 
OE. Wintunceaster ; Wincheste?' ; 
Wincestre(eME.), 6, i ; Winchestre, 
187, o; Winchrestre, 18S, 16; ds. 
Winchestren^ 187, 31. 


wind, w^d, sb., OE. wind, wind ; 
wifid, 50, 14; w^nde, 100, 22 ; pi, 
windes, 1S5, 6. 

wind0(n), j/Z).,OE.windan (windan)- 
wand (w^nd) (3) ; wmd, wrap, go ; 

inf. winden, i ; pt. sg. wt^nd, 
182, 5 ; pp. wounden, Sr, 21. Sth, 
pp. ywonden, 229, 8. 

winge, see weng. 

win3|rd, winyard, sb., OE. wln- 
geard ; vineyard (by infl. of vine) ; 
winiserd (eME.), 4, 25; ds. win^ 
yarde, 212, 4; wynyarde, 212, 5. 
winislrd, see win^frd. 
winnan, see winne(n). 
winne, sb., OE. wynn, /!; pleasure, 
joy, 55, 24. Sth. wiinne, 190, 31 ; 
pi. wiinnen, 193, 12. 
winne(n), wynne(n), sPv., OE. 
winnan-wann (3); strive, cofitend, 
win*, inf. winnan (eME.), 5, 6; 
winnenn (O), 10, 24; pr.pl. winnen, 
33 ; pi* sg. wan, 4, 23; pt. pL 
wonne, 203, 21 ; pp. wnne, 100, 12. 
Urth. inf. wyne, 146, 31. Sth. pp^ 
iwonne, 204, 23 ; ywonne, 216, 6. 
winter, wintre, sb., OE. winter; 
winter, 19, 23 ; gs. winteris, 47, 25 ; 
pi. wintre (eME.), 3, 23 ; winter, 
64, 26. 

wintre, sb., OE. wlntreo ; vifie, wine- 
tree, 31 , 33. 

winyard (wynyard), see win^frd. 
wirohe(n), wirke(n), wkv., OE, 
wyrcan-worhte; work\inf. wirchen, 
80,17; wirclie, 73, 29; wirrkenn 
(O), 8, 24; pt. jg-.wrohte, 4, 13; 
pp. wrohht (O), II, 2 ; wrougt, 55, 

I ; wroght, 109, 25. Wth. inf. 
wyrke, 143, 24; pp. wroght, 130, 
16. Sth. inf. wiirchen, 192, 29; 
pr. pi. wiirchety, 196, 10 ; imp. sg. 
wiirch, 194, 18 ; pp. iwxost (SEMI.) 
38, 34; iwraht, X92, 2. 
Wireohestre, OE.Wigraceaster; 
Worcester, 227, i. 

wirking, sb., OE. wyrcung, /. ; work- 

ing, doing, pain, 139, 3. 

wirm, worm, sb., OE. wyrm ; serpent, 
worm, 17, I ; pi. wormes, 49, 14. 
wirrkenn, see wirche(n.). 



470 


GLOSSARY 


wirseliip, BTth. == Ml. wiirschipe ; 

0£. weortSscipe ; worskipj 129, 29. 
wis, see wisse(n). 

wis, wiis, wys, adj.^ OE. wis ; wise^ 
23, 17 ; wiis, 72, 15 ; wys, 91, 28 ; 
stiperl. wiseste, 182, 31. 

wis, wiss, adv,^ OE. wiss ; certainly \ 
wiss (O), 12, 6 ; to wis, certainly ^ 
62, 12. 

wisdom, wisdome, sb, , OE. wisd5m ; 

wisdom^ 55, 10; wisdome, 103, 14. 
wise, sb.y OE. wise ; wise, manner, 
respect, 8, 15. iSTtli. wiss, 170, 22. 
Sth. ds. wisen, 189, 5. 
wiss, wisselioh, see wise, wisslxke. 
wisse(ii), wkv., OE. wisian, wissian ; 
guide, show, point out ; iitf. wisse, 
to be guided, 49, 20 ; pr, 3 sg. 
wisse?y, 192, I. ITtli. ps. sbj\ sg. 
WIS, 143, 6. 

wisslike, adv,, OE. wissllce; cer- 
tainly; wisslike, ii, 9. Sth. 
wisselich, 231, 19. 
wiste, wit, see wite(n), ic. 

wit, see wite(ii). 

wit, wyt, so., OE. witt ; wit, in- 
telligence ; witt (O), 8, 20 ; wyt, 
49, 18 ; wytt, 106, 16 ; wite, 50, 4 ; 
//. wyttes, 218, 17. 
wite^e, sb., OE. witega ; wise man, 
prophet, 188, 17. 

wite(n), ptprv., OE. witan-wiste ; 
know; inf. witenn (O), 10, 11 ; 
witen, 14, 17; wytt, 106, i6;pr. 

3 wgt, 23, 16; §t, 83, 19; 
^'99^y 242, 23 ; pr. 2 sg. wgst, 52, 
16; wg$st, 243, 14; pr. sbj. sg. 
wite, 194, 8; pt. sg. wiste, i, 6; 
wist, 49, 22 ; wyste, 53, 8 ;pt. 2 sg. 
wistist, 56, 1 ; pt.pl. wisten, 26, 25 ; 
wist, 71, 16. iSrth. pr. I, 3 sg. wat, 
12S, 14. Sfch. pr. I, 3 sg. wat 
(eSth.), 178, 22 ; mew't, onehno%vs, 
210, 19; pi. WLiteti, 199, 27, 
pt. sg. wiiste, 186, 4; pp. iwiisr, 
observed, kept, 201, 8. Kt. pt. pi. 
westen, 216, 19. 3ffeg. forms : pr. 
I? 3 nggt, 243, 20; nat (eME.), 

I So, 36 ; pr. pi, nyte]), 2 i*j, pt. 
sg. niste, 36, 7. Sth. pr. pi. zuite 
we, 196, pt. sg. niiste, 179, 13. 


wite(n), wkv., OE, witian ; keep, 
guard; inf wite, 39, 13 J P^‘ 
wite, 10, 10. Sth. inf. witie, 204, 
30; pr. 3 sg. wit< wite??, 178, 28 ; 
wip. sg. wite, 190, 23. 
wite(n), siv., OE. witan-wat (i) ;go, 
depart; Uth. inf. wit, I51, 24. 
wite(n), wkv., OE. witian ; blame ; 

inf. wite, 44, 21 ; pr. 2 sg. witest, 
55, 17* 

witer, see witter, 
witerly, see witterlike. 
wi‘8, wiJjJ), wid, wyd, wy]), prep, 
adv., OE. wi'S; against, with, 
according to, 2,4; wi])]) (0), 8, 23; 
wid, 6, 2 ; wyd, 6, 26 ; wyj?, 89, 
18 ; wit? j^an, with that, 187, 20. 
wipal, wipalle, wy]?al, adv. phr., 
OE. wi]) + OM. all ; withal, en- 
tirely, 54, 30; wijzalle, 38, 19; 
W3rj)al, 89, 29. 

wipdra5e(n), drawe(n), stv., OE. 
wi??dragan-dr6g (6) ; withdraw ; 
pt. sg. withdrew, 80, 5 ; pp. wip- 
drase, 44, 2. 

withdraweynge, sb., based on OE. 
*wi®dragan ; withdrawing, pt^rlom- 

ing, 147, 12. 

withdrew, see wipdra5e(n). 
wiSe, sb., OE. wither V,* conflict, 
190, I. 

wiperward, adj. adv., OE. wi?>’eT- 
weard ; advei'se, contrary, 2 28, 4. 
wiperwyne, sb., OE. wWerwinna ; 
adversaiy, enciny ; pi. wiperwynes, 
230, 3- 

wipinnen, wypynne, adv., OE. 
wi?5innan ; within ; wippinnenn (O), 
12, 10 ; wypynne, 100, 9. 
wipmme(rL), stv., OE wiiS + niman- 
nom (4) ; take away ; pp. wipnumen, 

10^12. __ 

wipoutyn (withowttene, wip'owte), 
see wipiiten. 

withstande(n), -st9nde(n), ^/z^.,OE. 
wiSstandan (st9ndan)~stod (G) ; 
withstand ; pt. sg. withstod ; stood 
by, 48, 6. 

withtake(ii), stv., OE. wit? + ON, 
taka-t5k (6); blame, repi-ove; pr. 
ppL withtakand, 144, 4, 



GLOSSARY 


471 


wx’S'lSan, aciv., OE. vrilS (©on); 
provided that^ 30, 15; with, jjan, 
81, 7. 

wi]>^e(n), widuten, wijxute, wi- 
poute(n), adv. prep,^ OE. wi©utan ; 
vaithotit^ except ; wijj^utenn (O), 1 1, 
36;j^iduten, 6, 9; wij)ute, 37, 9; 
wi>outyn,j[oo, 5 ; withowttene, 145, 
26; withowte, 204, 15, 
witie(n), see wite(n). 
witne(n), 70^., ON. vitna; testify^ 
prove ; p?\ 3 sg, witne©, 202, 3. 
witnesse, wyttnes, sb.^ OE. witness, 
f.'t witness, 228, 20. NtJx. wyttnes, 
147, 19* , 

witnessefn), wkv,, based on witnesse, 
sb.\ witness; pr. 3 sg. wytnesset, 
215, 14 ; pr. sbj. sg. witnesse, 226, 
21. 

wltt, see ic. 

witter, witer, adj., ON. vitr; know- 
ing, wise, clear, 30, 10; witer, 
189, 6. 

witterlike, witterly, wytterly, wit- 
torliclie, adv,, ON. vitr + OE. lice ; 
surely, evidently, 29, 32 ; witterly, 
7I1 7; wytterly, iir, 7. StE. 
witterliche, 200, 17. 
witty, adj,, OE. witig, wittig ; wise, 
skilful, 7 vitty, 170, 16. 
witunge, sh,, OE. *witung,yC ; guard- 
ing, caretaking, 203, 9. 
wive, see wif. 

wive(n), wkv,, OE. wifian ; marry, 
take a wife ; iff wiven, 193, 18 ; 
pr. sb^ sg, wive, 103, 18. 
wlaeie(n), 7 vkv., OE. wlacian ; become 
lukewarm or tepid; pp, iwlaht, 195, 
18. 

wlafE^iag, cf. MDn.blaffen,' stam- 
mer’; stammering, 224, 15. 
wlech, adf, StE. « Ml* wlach ; OE. 

wlsec ; lukewarm, tepid, 195, 18. 
wlite, sb., OE. wlite, wlita, wk . ; 
face, form, 28, 3a ; wliten (< OE. 
wlita-wlitan?), 29, i. 
w§, see wb.6. 

wg, sh., OE. wa; woe, 23, 4. 
woame, w6o, see wuxie, w&ke(3i). 
wgontesse, sK, OE. wacnes,/. ; weak- 
ness, meanness of condition, 198, 13. 


wod, adj., OE. w5d ; mad, angry, 44, 
9 ; w6de, 97, 3. 
wode, see wude. 

wodelukest, adv., OE. wodllce; most 
madly, 195, 16. 

Wodnesdei, Wedenysday, sb., OE. 
Wodnesdseg ; Wednesday ; pi. Wod- 
nesdawes, 200, 2; Wednesday, 
228, 21. 

W93, sb., OE. wag(h) ; wall, 216, 24. 
wogh, sb., OE. woh ; eml, wrong, 

131, 15. 

woke, see wTiike. 
wol, wold, see wille(n). 
wgld, sb., OM. wdd, wald, WS. 
weald ; power, meaning, 23, 26 ; 
haven ... on wgld, have in power, 
obtain, 55, 22. 

wgld, sb., OM. wald, WS. weald; 

woodland; ds. wglden, 182, 10. 
wold©, see will©, vh. 
wglde(n), stv., OM. waldan, waldan 
(WS. wealdan)-weold (R); have 
power over, control, possess ; wglden, 
18, 2. 

wole, woUde, wolt, see wille, vb» 
woUe, see wnlle. 

wgmbe, sb., Sth.=Ml. womb^ ; OE. 
wamb, wamb,y. ; stomach, womb, 
207, 12. 

womman (women, womene), see 
wimman. 

won (woned), see wune(n). 
won, sb., OE. wan; lack; ds. wone, 
199, 13. 

wond, wgnd, see wnnde, wind©(n). 
won©, see wune. 

wgnd, sb., OE. *wand ?, ON. vbndr ; 
wand, rod, 55, 29. 

wgnde(n), wkv., OE. wandian (wgn- 
dian); turn aside, refrahi from, 
alter; vgnde, 114, 9. 
wonder, see wnnder. 
wgndrie(n), wkoj., Stb, *= Ml. wan- 
dre(n) ; OE. wandrian, wgndrian ; 
wander; wgndrTen, 182, 11. 

wgne, sb., perhaps ON. van, y; ; hope, 
thought; pi. wgnys, 113, 12. 

would, see wune(n). 
wgng, sh., QE. wang, wgng; plain i 
pi. wgnges, 76, 32. 



472 


GLOSSARY 


wgnz&i sb., 0E.wange,w9nge ; cheek \ 
//. wgnges, 156, 32. 
wonne, see winne(n). 
wont, see wune(n), 
wony, see wiine(n). 
wonynge, wonyng, sh,, OE. wunung, 
f , ; dwellings home, 221, 5. 
w§nys, see wgne. 

woodnesse, sb., OE. wodnes, f,\ 
madness, 238, 14. 

W99st (w9pt), see wite(n). 
wop, sb., OE. wop ; weeping, 215, 
21. 

wop, wopen, see wepe(n). 
wppned, pp. as adj., ON. viipna, 
cpgn. with OE. w^pnian; arnud, 
weaponed, 33, i. 

word, sb., OE. word, word ; word ; 
word (O), 8, 23 ; pi. wordes, 243, 
24. Nth.//, wnrdes, 1 36, S. e Sth. 
ds. weorde, 176, 3; pi. word, 176, 

, 9; worden, 188, 20. 
w6rclie(n), wkv., Sth. = Ml. wo.- 
de(n) ; OE. woidian ; utter xvords ; 
pp. iworded, 198, 4. 
wordle, W9re(n), see world, be(n). 
wpri, adj., OE. warig; dirty, stained 
with seaweed, iSo, 22. 
world, see world. 

worldlich, adj., Sth. = Ml. worldll ; 

OE, woruldllc ; worldly, 194, 2. 
worm, see wirm. 

worschipe, worssippe, see wur- 
schipe. 

worschype, see wurschepe(n). 
worst©, worp, see worse, wiirp, 
worpe(n), see wiirpe(n). 
wor J)mgni5ht, sb., OE. weor^Jung + 
niht ; worthing-night, feast of puriji- 
caiionl, 230, 5. 

worpis, worthit, see wurpe(n). 
worpnesse, sb., OE. weortyness, f. ; 

dignity, honor, 226, 7. 
worpsippe, see wurscldpo. 
worthy, see wurpi. 
woruldwele, sb., elVCB. , OE. weonild- 
wela; worldly wealth, 180, 31. 
wosg, see whosp. 
wgst, wot, see wite(n). 

Tyon5, adj., OE* woh; bad, evil, 

58, a- 


wounde, see wunde. 
wounden, see winde(n). 
wdunde(n), wkv., OE, wtindian 
(wundian); wound; pp. wounded, 
31 - 

wounder, see wunder. 
wrac, sb. , OE. wrsec ; misery ,pmiish~ 
ment, wrack, 60, 16. 
wrahe, sb., OE. wracu; vengeatice, 
141, 17. 

wrancwis, adj., ©ME. = Ml. wrpng- 
wis ; ON. rangr + ME. wis ; imjust, 
wrong; ds. wrancwTse, 177, 24. 
wrang, see wrgng. 
wrangwxslie, wrangwyaely, adv., 
ON.wrangr + ME..wis + 11 ; wroiigly, 
unjustly, 155, 33; wiangw3?bely, 

I 47 » 13. 

wrappe(n), wkv., origin uncertain; 

wrap ; mf, wrappa, 241, 7. 
wrastelyng©, pr. ppl. as sb., OE. 

wr^stlian; wrestling, 120, 19. 
wrastli©(n), wkv., Sth. = Ml. wrast- 
le(n) ; OE. wrrestlian ; wrestle ; pt. 
pi, wrastlede, 207, 8. 
wrat, see writ©(n). 
wrath (wraSor, wratSost), see wrpp. 
wrappe, sb., OE. wrK'bb, WTa'fftJo- 
wrath, 46, II. 

wrapp©(n),2£//'z/.,OE. wratSian ; make 
wroth, beco 7 ne a^igy ; inf. wrajipe, 
104, 25. Sth, pr. sbj, sg. wrafei, 
192, 32. 

wra 1 J 5 ie(n), see wrappe(n). 
wrocc©, wrecCho, see wrech©. 
wreccehed, wrecohfde, wreched- 
h§d, so., based on OE. wrecca 4- 
ME. hfde ; wretchedness, misery, 3, 
30; wrecchgde, 209, 16. 
wreochfd©, see wroccehf de, 
wreohch©, see wrecho. 
wrech© (wxfch©), sb., OM. wrec, 
WS. wrKc,}C ; vengeance, 59, 6. 
wrech©, wretch©, wrecche, sb., OE. 
wrecca; wretch, 49, 7; wretche, 
49» ; pi^ wrechen, 195, 7. 

wrech©, adj., OE. wrecc ; wretched, 
48, 1 1 ; wrecce, 2, 32 ; wretche* 49. 
23 ; wrechche, 215, 3. 
wrechidnes, sb., based on OE. wrecc ; 
wretchedness, 144, 20, 



GLOSSARY 


473 


vtrTeie(rL), wJk/., OE. wregan; accuse^ 
betray^ cf. archaic {J)e)wray ; pr. 
sbj\ sg. wreie, 38, 15 ; pt.sg. wreide, 
I, 2 . 

wr§ke(n), siv., OE. wrecan-wr3ec(5); 

avenge \ pp. \vr9ken, 160, iS. 
wrench, sb.^ OE. wrenc \guik^ deceit, 
artifice, trick ; ds. wrenche, 207, 10. 
WT0ng3e, sb,, as if OM. wrengS, WS. 

wrieng^^y*. ; distortion, 16, 10. 
wretche, see wreche. 
wrfpe, wreth, sb., OE. wr^©, fi, 
wiEcffu, indcL ; wrath, 69, 16. Nth. 
wrfth, 227,14. Kt , wrei)e, 211,21. 
wre'iS' 5 e(n)j«;^’ 2 /., OE.wr£c 5 an; attger^ 
get angry ; zVyi wrecJften, 194, 5 ; pt. 
sg. wretytSede, 193, 3. 
wrigtelfslike, a^v.,cL OE. gewyrht ; 
in manner without desert, wrong- 
fully, 22, I2t 

wrigtful, adv., OE. wyrht + ful ; 
deservedly, 26, 12. 

wrihte, sb., OE. wryht,/. ; thing done, 
merit, blame \ wrihhte (0),ii, 26. 
WTinge(n), stv>, OE. wringaii-wrang 
(wrgng) (3) j wring, twist, press; 
inf wringe, 59, 18 ; pt, sg. wr§ng, 
2X, 28. 

writ, sb., OE. writ; writing, writ; 

writt (0), 13, 30; writ, 46, 28. 
WTite(n), siv., OE. wrltan-wrat (i); 
write ; inf. wrltenn (O), lo, 3 ; pr. 
shj. sg. write, 10, 7 ; pt. sg. wrat 
(eME.), 12, 24; wrgt, 71, 19; 
wrggt, 245, 29 ; pp. writeim, 10, 8 ; 
writen, 71, 25; wry ten, 119, 6; 
write, 69, 23 ; wryte, 90, 21. Sth. 
pp. iwriten, 179, 29 ; y write, 72, 20. 
writeing, sb,, OE, writing ,/. ; writing, 
72, 26. 

wrij)©(n), siv., OE. wrTtJan-wratS (1) ; 
twist, turn, bkid, writhe ; pr. ppl. 
wrljiuide, 55, 29 ; pt. pi. wry then, 

wTOght(e), wroht(e), wrohht, see 
wlrche(n). 

WTgken, see wrfke. 
wrfng, adj\, sb., ON. vrang ; twisted, 
awry, wrong, 16, 3 ; ds. wrgnge, 58, 
23. Nth. wrang, 127, ii. 
wr^ng, see wringe (n). 


wrggt, wrgt, see write(n). 

WT§}), WTothe, adj.j OE. wraS" ; wroth, 
angy, bad, 35, 20 ; wrgthe, 112, 16 ; 
to wrgjjer hfle, to bad health, evil 
fate, 62, 30, Nth. wrath, 127, 12. 
eSth. to wratJer hfale, 193, 7 ; 
supefd. wra'cJest, 1S9, 7. 
wrgper, see wrgp. 

WTOujt, see •wirche(n). 

WT^e(n), see WTite(n), 
wrythen, see wrij>e(n). 
wu, adv. , Sth. — ML hQ ; OE. hwu, 
hii ; how, 209, 16. 

wTiaswa, wiich, see whosg, while. 
Wilde, sb., OE. wudu < widti ; wood, 
forest; wodc, 51, 9. 
wuke, OE. wucu<wiocu; week; 
pL wukes, 34, 26; woke, 118, 5. 
Cf. wike. 

wulde, wule, whlle'iy, see wille, vh. 
wale, see while. 

wulf, sb., OE. wulf; wolf, 82, 17; 
pi. waives, 199, 4. 

wnlle, sb., OE. wull, wulle,/. j wool; 
wolle, 86, 16. 

WTilvine, sb., OE. wylfen,/., mod. by 
wulf; she^wulf, 82, 17. 

WTimme, interj., OE. wa me ; woe is 
195, 33. 

wummon, wuinmen, see winunan. 
wunde, wounde, sb., OE. wund,/. ; 
wound, 20, 12; pi. woundes, 60, 
28. Nth. wond, 146, i. Sth. p2. 
wondes, 221, 7; wunden, 190, 10. 
wander, sh., OE. wundor, -er, neut. ; 
wonder, prodigy, miracle ; wonder, 
68, 22; wounder, 173, 13; is’a adv., 
wonder, wondrously, 159, 26 ; pi. 
wunder, a, 28 ; 3, 20. 
wunderlic, adj., OE. wunderlic ; 
wonderful, marvelous, pi. 5, 3; 
wunderlukeste, 178, 12. 
wiindi, adj., OE. *wyndig, perh, 
♦wendig, IWS. wyndig, w^ndig, cf. 
MLG. wendich ; averse, 193, 2. 
wundie(n), wkv., Sth. - ML wun- 
de(n), OE, wundian, wCndian; 
wound; pp. iwOndet, 192, 10. 
wane, wone, sh., OE. wnna ; custotn, 
habit, dwelling*, pi, wanes, 29, 5; 
won, 62,13. woanes, 202 , S, 



474 


GLOSSARY 


w\me, adj,, OE. gewuna; accustomed^ 
wont, 22, 3. 

•wune, see winne(n). 
wuiie(2i), wkv,, OE. wunian ,* inhabit, 
dwell, remaini inf. wunen, 19, 24; 
wime, 43, 12 ; wone, 220, 22 ; pr. 
3 sg. WTineS, 19, 19 ; pr. pi. wunen, 
34, 17 ; pr. ppl. wonyng, 222, 17 ; 
pt. sg. wunede, 33, i > pp> wuned, 
39, 25; woned, 48, 13 ; wont, 48, 
25 ; wunt, 98, 6. ITth. pr. pi. won, 
134, 10. Sth.. inf. wunien, 180, 
39 ; wdn^, 220, 10 ; pr. pi. wuneS, 
180, 16; w6nej>, 222, 24 ; pr. sbj. 
*5^.wunnie, 191, 9; pp- iwuned, 17^5, 
I ; ywoned, 225, 6. 

wunlicli, adj., Sth. = Ml. winllc ; 
OE. wynlic ; pleasant, winsome, 
183, 19. 

wunne, see wlnne. 
wnnnie, see wmie(n). 
wiinsum, adj., Sth. = Ml. winsum ; 
OE. wynsum; winsome, pleasant, 

195, 

w^chen, see wirche(ix). 

WTird, see word. 
wTirrpenn, see warpe(n). 
WTixschepe(n), -sohipe(n), whv., 
based on OE. weoiSscipej honor, 
worship, ; pp. wurscheped, 97, 16. 
wTurschipe, worsehipe, wurtscipe, 
sh., OE. weorSscipe ; dignity, honor, 
worship', wurscipe, 1,12; wurtscipe, 
4, 16 ; worsehipe, 116, 14; wur?S- 
schipe, 199, 22, Sth. worjjsippe, 
215, 17- 

wiirse, see -werse. 

wTiriJ, adj., OE. weortJ, wur?5 ; worth, 
of value, honored, good ; wurth, 158, 
8 ; wor^, 215, 16. 

wuitJ, wurth, sh., OE. weor?5, wurtS ; 

worth, dignity ; pi. wurtJes, 195, 7. 
■WTir]7e(n), worpe(n), OE.weor- 

tSan (wur^an)-wear^ become, he; 

inf. wiirr])enn (O), 10, 19 ; wur^en, 
32, 27 ; wer])e (SEMI.), 68, 14; pr. 
2 sg. wurt?est, 18S, 16; pr. 3 sg. 
wureJe^, 15, 30; pr. sbj. sg. wur^e, 
17, 20; War'S, 21, 22 j worjje, 48, 
10 j wor}), 2 i8, 24 ; pt. sg. ward, l, 
15; warth, I, 18; warrj (0), ii, 


17 ; wart, 5, 12 ; wuifS, 21, 26 ; ps. 
pi. wur^Je, 2, 16; wurthen, 6, 9. 
mh.j&r. ^sg. w6r]?is, 171, 24; wh. 
pt. worthit, 1 71, 27. 
wT2rpe(n), wh^., OE. weorSian ; 

honor', pr.pl. wnrtJen, 34, 16. 
wurpi, worthy, adj., OE. weortSig ; 
worthy, 18, 8 ; wurrjji (0), 10, 19 ; 
Fur>y, 97, 15; worthy, iii, 23; 
wurthT, 138, II ; super 1 . worthiest, 
232, 19. 

wurtSing, sb., OE. weor'Sung, ; 

honor, ornament, 24, 12. 
wur^lie, wurtSli, wiirtSliche, adj., 
OE. weorSlIc ; valuable, of woHh, 
18, 31; wurSlI, 48, 21; wurthll, 
143, 7. Sth. wurSlIche, 183, 6. 
wuste, wute(rL), see wite(n). 
wychecraft, wychecrafte, sb., OE. 
wicceerseft; witchcraft, 49, 21 ; 
wychecrafte, 125, 23. 
wyd, wydur, see wip, wheper. 
wydewe, sb., OE. widuwe ; widow ; 

pi. wydewes, 59, 18. 
wyefe, w^, w^e, see wdf. 
wyfman, see winunaru 
wyghte, wyk, see wijt, wikke. 
wyke, see wike. 

wykked, wyl, see wikked, wil. 
wryl, sb., OE. wdl ; wile, deceit, 58, 10. 
wylke, wylle, see while, wille(n). 
wyllis, see will©, vb. 
wylny (wylnede), see wilni©(n). 
wylnynge, sb., OE. wilnung, f, ; de- 
sire, 216, 25. 

wymman, wyu, see wimman, win. 
wyne, wynne, see wiime(n). 
wynd, w^de, sec wind. 
wynke(iL), whv., OE. wincian ; winh, 
close the eyes, sleep ; ITth. pt. sg. 
wynkit, winked, 171, 32. 

Wynne, see winne. 
wynne(n), see winne (n). 
wyrke, wys, see wirche(^n), wiis, 
wysche(n), see washe(n). 
wyste, see wite(n). 
wyt, wytt, see wit. 
wyte, wytene, see wlte(n). 
wyp (wythand compounds), see wip. 
wyph9lde(n), stv., OM. witJhaldan 
(WS. healdan)-heold (R); wiih^ 



GLOSSAIiY 


475 


hold ; inf. wy])h§lde, 94, 29 ; pt, sg. 
vvyj)helde, 96, 8. 

•wytriesseblryng, sb.^ OE., witnes,y. 

+ bering; witness-beaniig, 236, 16. 
wytnesset, see witnesse(ii). 
wytterly, see witterlike. 
wyttnes, sb., OE. witnes; witness^ 
147, 19. 
see wif. 

5. 

58lrL, ^aff, see ^en, 5eve(ii). 

^ald, 5ald, see 5elde(n). 

5are, ^arew, ^arew, ^arewe, see 
^aru. 

5arfcie(iiL), whv., Sttu^^Ml. 5arke(n) ; 
OE. gearkian ; prepare^ make ready ; 
pt, sg. sarkede, 206, 16 ; pp. isarket, 

195. 19- 

5arnand, sec 5eme(n). 
japu, 5arew, ^aro, adj.^ OE. gearu- 
gearwe ; ready ^ eMnE. ya 7 -e ; eME. 
5aru, 187, 21 ; garew, 195, 31; pL 
Sarewe, 1S4, 31 ; jare, 205, ii. 
5ate, sb,^ OM. gat, WS, geat, 
gate, 59, 1. 

^ave, see 5eve(n). 

^e, 5eare, see J)u, 5er. 

5ed(e), jeden, see ga, g9(n). 

5ef, 5 effc, see 5 if, 5ov6(n), ;yft. 
5 eliate(n), stv,-, eME.«Ml. h9te(n) ; 
OE. gehatan-het (^hcht) (R) ; call', 
gehalen, i, ii ; 5 ehatenn (O), 
II, 14. 

5eid, ^eit, see ga, 3et. 

5eie(n), ^kv., ON. gem, ‘bark’; 
shout {jnockingly ) ; inf. 5eien, 194, 
22 

5el, \b., OM. *gell, WS. *giell, cf. 
gellan, giellan, * to yell ’ ; yell, 62, 
14. 

^m,sb., OM.gtdd, WS. gield (gyld) ; 
payment of money, tribute’, pL 
gaddes (eME.), 3, 23; pi, geldes, 

361de(n), stv., OM. geldan (geldan), 
WS. gieldan-gald, WS. geald (3) ; 
recompense, yield, pay tidbute ; inf 
^eldenn (O), ii, 12; selde, 90, 28; 
pr-Z sg, 5eldeJ), 104, 26; imp, sg. 


Selde, 102, 15 ; yeld, 212, 13 ; imp, 
pi. 5elde]), 195, 31 ; pt, sg, g§ld 
(SEMI.), 24, 24 ; 5|lde,47, 14; /A 
yglde, 2 1 7, 1 7. Nth. inf, jeld, 1 29, 
28; yeild, T34, 18; pt, sg, yald, 
132, 31; 5ald < 5ald, 169, 31. 
Sth. pr. 3 sg. sell, 198, 5; pp, 
i5olde, 47, 9. 

3 eldyng, 3eldeing, sb. < prp. OM. 
geldan, geldan ; yieldmg, pay7nent 
of debt, recoffipetise, 104, 2 ; pi, 
Seldeinges, 104, 16. 

3elle(n), siv., OM. gellan-gall, WS. 
giellan-geal (3); yell', inf jelle,^ 
59, 25. Nth. inf. yel, 15 1, 29.' 
Wa,pr,pl. yelle];, 215, 16. 

^elome, ilome, adv., OE. gelome; 
frequejitly, 177, 23. 

3elt, see 5§lde(n). 

^enae, sh., OM. geme, WS. gleme; 
care, heed, 68, 27. 

5eme(n), wkv,, OM. gemen, WS. 
gleman ; care for, guard ; jeme, 49, 
27 ; yeme, 76, 3 ; yemen, 84, 10. 

5en, 3Sn, prep, adv., OE. gegn; 
agamst; 5^n (O), 9, 21, 

5fne(n), wkv., OE. ’‘‘ga'nan?, cf. OE. 
ganian ; yawn ; pt. sg. 5|nede, 61,13. 

5eng]?e, sb,, based on OE. geong, 
OM. gung; youth, 104, 20. 

3eond, see ^ond. 

3eong, see ^ung. 

5eonge(n), stv., OE. geongan (R) ; 
go, 7tiffue', inf jeongen, 182, 16; 

P* 317- gange(ii), 

^eornliehe, adv., OE. geornllce; 
earnestly, 192, 16. 

3eorno, 3eove(ii), see 3erne, 3eve(ii). 

3er, ger (gear), sb,, OM. ger, WS. 
gear, neut, j year, 9, s ; gear, I, I ; 
g^r, 1, 18 ; gwre, i, 13 ; pi, ger, 
22, 29; gere, 24, 8 ; geres, 24, 25 ; 
5eres, 57, 2 ; yerys, 115, 25. Nth. 
gere, 143,18 ; A* gere, 165, 10; yeir, 
132, TO. Sth. sfr, 199, 33 ; pi, 
5|r, tSo, 20. Kt. yea.r, 215, ii. 

3frde, sb., OE. geard,/". ; rod, MnE. 
yard (a 7neasureinent ') ; Sth. pi, 
5|rden, 194, 21. 

3ere, see ^er. 

3exnd, see 3erne(B). 



476 


glossary 


^Srne, OM. geme, WS. geome ; 1 
earnestly ^yearningly eSth. ! 

jeome, 177, 25. 

5erne(n), wkv., OM. geman, WS. 
gieman; desire, yearn for \ inf. 

I3I, I ; 2 semndesst 

(O), 8, 24; pp. 5ernd, 58, 23. 
pr. 3 sg. yernes, 126, i; pr. ppl. 
jarnand, 166, 11. Stli, pr. 1 sg. 
5lme, 202, 20; pp. isirnd, 192, 24. 
'm.pr. 3 sg. yem]), 219, 21. 

5erre(n), stv., OE. georran-gear (3) ; 
resound, roar, hobble ; pt. pi. 5urren, 

187, 2. 

Sesoeafbj sh., eStli. = Ml. shaft ; OE. 
gesceaft/ ; abated thing, crecUure, 
178, 28. 

aet, get (gSt), 5ete (^ete), ^it, adv. 
conj.y OM. get, WS. giet; yet, S, 
15; get, 2, 20; gSt, 3> 
jete, 38, 6 ; jete, 40, 31 ; ^it, 
41, 18; yet§, 8 o,_2, Sth. 5>et 
(eSth.), I 7 j 5 , 5; 5ut (IWS. gyt), 
203, 20; 5dte, 210, 16. 

3et, see g9(n). - . / s 

3ete(n), stv., OE. geotan-geat (2) ; 
pour*, pt. sg. Sgt, 194, 21 ; pt.pL, 
59ten, 60, 18. 

3 ete(ii), stv., OE. geetan-tet (5); 
eat\ pp. i3|l.e, 205, 30* . 

3ette(iL), wkv., OM. getan (*gettan), 
WS. geatan ; grant, give *, pt. sg. 
jettede, 192, 12. 

5eve(n), 2ive(2i), stv., OM. gefan 
*gifan ( WS. giefan)--gaf (WS. geaf) 
(5); gyven, I, 9; iiven, 

6, 5 ; geven, 33, 14; 5ive, 35» 21 ; 
5eve, 38, 10; yive, 79, 24; yeven, 
81, 6 ; Byve, SB, 11; pr. i sg., Beve, 
care for, 195, z\pr. 3 sg. yeveth, 
78, 30; pfT. sbj. sg. Bife, 13, 21; 
Bive, 41, 32; imp. sg. Bif, 74» 27; 
yif, 85, 22; imp.pl. 5eveJ?, 99, 
17 ; pt. sg. iaf, I, 10 j Baff (0), il, 
25 ; gaf, 29, 8 yaf, 77* 22 j _ Bav^, 
90, 14; pt. pi. iafen, 2, 26 ; laven, 
6, 27; pp. given, 34, n; yeven, 
242, 16, Sth. inf. Beoven (Ml.?;, 
185, 23 ; 5ieven, 178, 8 ; Biven, 199, 
19; pr. 3 sg. Bivet, 178, 15; Bi^^, 
180, 24; yef>, 214, 12 ; pr. sbj. sg. 


Beove (Ml.?), J 

212, 14; pt. sg. Bef, 204, 31 ; 5 ai, 

220, 2l\ pp. i5ive, 206, 7. 'Kt.pr. 

^ ss!". ye^j 314, 12. 

3ev6«e, adj., OE. gife«e; gtPen, 
granted, iS 6 , 25 . 

^ew (she), see pii. 

5hwilk, see while. 

aieven, see aeve(n). 

aif,5iff,3ef (gef),i:tf»/.,OE. gif; if 

^ 101,4; Biff (O), 10, II ; gif=5if, 

4, 20; Bef, Ii9ji7;gef, 19.4; 

76, 12 ; yef, 154, 19 ; yi^> ^ 44 ? ^ 7 * 
airnen, see 5eriie(2i). 

^isterdai, sb., OE. geostrandteg, gis- 
tTzxi!^^g\ yesterday, 103, 2. 
sit, see Set. * . -r^ 

2ive, sh., Sth. = Ml. geve, give, gift ; 
OM.*gefu, gifti,WS.giefu/.; gift, 

i^B, 18. Cf. 5yft, 

5ive(iL), 5ove(rL). . ^ _ . 

59, adv., ON. ja, cogn. with OM. ge, 
WS. gea ; yes, yea, 99, 6. Cf. 

Sole, sh., ON. jol, cogn. with OE. 

geolj yole,yLnE. 5^«7-??,95,» I7- 
5011, ^ouQjprn., OM. gon, WS. geon; 
Bone, 98, 25. 

aond, prep, adv., OM. gond, Wb. 
geond ; around, afitong, through*, 
Beond (eSth.), 182, ii ; Bont, 192, 
25- 

aong, aonger, see sung, 
songling, sb'., OM. B^oglmg, WS. 
geongling ; youth, young man, 

44 : 3 - 

iont, see aond. 

39re, adv., OM. gara, WS. geara; 

long since, yore, of old, 42, 15. 

3 ork, see Eouwerwic. 

^gten, see 3ete(n). 
aoure, see ^hr. 

aoupe, youthe, sh., OM. gngo?i, WS. 
geoguty,/. ; youth, 55, 19 ; youthe, 
240, 28. Sth. Buhet’e, 192, 10. 
50W, aude, seej>% ga(n). 

3-uhetfe, aoupe. 

axuig (iung), gong, yung, adj., OM. 
gung, WS. geong; young; wh. 
iunge, 7, ir; Bong, 53, 28; wk. 
ynnge,86,3i ; 7>/.yinige,76,3; comp. 
Bonger, 66, iB; superl. gungest, 24, 



GLOSSARY 477 


32; yongeste, 244, eSth. pL 
jeonge, 188, 12. 

5ur, gur, 5 c 5 ur, yom^poss^pm,, OE. 
eower;j^r; gur, 4; gure, 
25^18; your, 57, 15 ; 30uj;e, 57,17; 
yowre^ 235, 15. St^ower, 194, 
24 ; ouwer, 201, 12 ; cure, 197, 18. 

^Tirren, see 5erre(n). 

3ut, ^wat, see ^et, who. 

5wanne, 5 were, see whanne, wher. 

5wi, 5 wider, see whi, whider. 

5 wile, ^wilene, see while, whilen. 

5w6, see who. 

5yet, see ^et. 

5yft, 5eft, sh., OM, geft, WS. gift ; 

89, 22 ; pL seftes, 221,15. Cf. 
5ive. 

^yng, adj,^ Sth. = Ml. Jung; WS. 
geong ; 176, 4. 

5ynge, see 3eonge(n). 

5ys, adv,. OM. *gese < *geswa, WS. 
gea + swa ; yes^ 1 14, 22. 

5yve, 5yve(n), see 5eve(u). 


Y. 

yaf, yald, see 5eve(n), 5elde(ii). 
yare, see fre. 

yare, adv,, OM. gare, WS. geare; 

readily^ archaic 107, 16. 

ybe, yhlent, see be(n), blende(ii). 
ybleved, see blfve(ii). 
yblisced, see blesse(n). 
ybgre, yb9re(n), see bfre(rL). 
ybrou^t, see brmge(ii). 
yoaried, see oarie(n). 
ychaunged, see cha-ang0(n). 
yche, yclenzed, see ilc, clense(n). 
yclfpnd, see clfpe(n). 
yclgjjed, see ol§))e(ri). 
ycome, see cume(n). 
ycoyned, see come( 3 i). 
ydiU, ydel, see idel. 
ydillness, see idelnesae. 
ydo, ydon, see don, 

Ydoine, sb,, OF. Idoine; Idoine^ 
127, 3. 

ydronke, see drixdj:e(n). 
ydxyve(n), see drive(n). 
ydul, yS, see Idell, Jju. 


yf , ad^.^ OM. gS, WS. gea ; yeajyes, 
341, 7. 

yealde(n), w/kf., Kt. WS. ealdian, 
^ow old ; pr, 3 sg. jealdeJ), 219, i. 
Cf. elde(n). 

year, yede, see 5er, g9(n). 
yef (yf), yef]?, see ^if, 5eve(n). 
yeild, yeir, see 5elde(n), ^er. 
yel, yelle]?, see 5elle(n). 
yeld, see 5elde(n). 
yeiae(n), see 5eTne(rL). 
yer, see ^er. 

yfrd, sh., OE. geard, geard ; yard^ 
86, 18. 
yere, see ^er. 

yemes, (yemej>), 5erne(n). 
yesy^te, sb., OM. ege + sihte == sihSe, 
eyesight^ 124, 20. 
yete, yeve(n), see ^et, 5eve(n). 
yfayled, yfel, see f aile(n), yvel. 
yljen, yg^n (yguo), see e^e, g§(n). 
yhent,yherd, hente(n), here(n). 
yhidde, see hidde(n). 
yh9ten, yhgve, see hgte (n), hf ve (n) . 
yhyer, see ihere(n), 
yif, yiven, see ^if, 5eve(n). 
yknowe, see knowe(n). 
ylad, yladde, see Ifde(n). 
ylaste(n), ylde, see laste(n), elde. 
yleft, see love(n), 

yleste(n), Kt. gelestan, WS. 

gel^stan; endure^ Iasi; Kt. inf, 
yleste, 215, 13. 

ylet, yleyd(-id), J^<?lete(n), leie(n). 
yli^t, see ligte(n). 
ylle, ylgre, see iUe, lese(n). 
yl§nd, sh,, Sth. == Ml. eilgnd, il^nd; 
WS. iegland (-Ignd); island, 220, 
I. Cf. eilond. 
ylyemed, see lerne(n). 
ymad, make(n). 
ymelled, see nielle(n). 
yma^e, sb,, OF.image ; image, 145, 23. 
yn, see in. 

Ynde, sb,, OF. Inde ; India, 240, 26. 
ynesche, adj,, OE. *gehnesce ; soft, 
tender, gentle, 144, 14. 

Yngland, see Ingland, 
ynime(n), stv., OE. geniman-nom 
(4)3 seize, take; pt. sg, ynam, 73, 
13 ; ynomen, 65, 4. 



GLOSSARY 


478 

ynlrurly, adb.^ based on ON. einkar 
+ ME. 11 ; specially^ particularly^ 
172, I. ^ 
ynne, see 

71105, ynomen, see inob., ynime(xL). 
ynou, ynougb., ynow, ynug, see 
inob. 

ygde, ^ngeste, see 5elde(ii), 5ung. 
yd^, yoiipe,_££<! 5br. 
youtbe, see ^oupe. 
ypased, see passe(n). 
ypeynt, ypeynted, see peyiite(n). 
ypocrisye, sb,, OF. ipocrisie; hy- 
pocrasy, 219, 5. 

ypocrite, sb,, OF. ipocrite; hypocrite \ 
pL ypocrittes, 14^ 10. 
jrpiuiissed, see p'umscbe(n). 
7put(t), see putte(n). 

(yren), see ireii. 

Yriscb, odj,^ OE. ’’'Irisc ; Irish^ 222, 
_ II* 

Yrloande (-Ignd), see Irelgnde. 
yme, see iren. 

yrokked, pp. as adj., ON. (Dan.) 
- rokka; rocked^ 224, 22. 
Yryscbman, OE, *Iriscman; 
Irishman ; pL Yryschmen; 221,3. 

ys, see be(n), 

Ysaae, sh.^ OE. Isaac; Isaac, 130, 
.. 23 - 

Ysambrase, sb,, OF. Isambrace ; 
Isambrace, 127, i. 

yscbilt, pp. OE. seilian ; separated, 
divided.^ p. 267. 
yse, see ise(n). 

ysel]>e, sb., Stb. = Ml. seljje ; OE. 
ges^lS, f . ; happiness, prosperity, 
wealth, advantage, 176, 15. 
ysen (ysey), see ise(n). 
yspent, see sende(2i). 
ysey, yseyd, see seie(n), ise(ii). 
yslawe, yslayn, see slgCn). 

Ysote, sb., OF. Isolde; IseuU, 126, 
I 7 -* 

yspild, yspylt, see spille(ii), 
ystabled, see stable(ii). 
ystpnde, see stand0(n). 

yt, ytake(ix), see be, take(n). 


ytau^t, see t§obe(iL). 
yu (yuu), yung, see ^ung. 
yused, see use(n). 

yvel (yfel), yvil, adj., sb., OE. yfel ; 
^il, bad’, yfel, 2, il ^ yvil, 5^> > 

ds. yfele, 176, 19; pi yvele, 3, i; 
pi. as sb. ivels, loi, 5. Stb. ds. 
iivele, 177, 2. 

ywakened, see wakxLe(iL). 
ywent, see weiide(n), 

ywil, see iwil. 

ywonden, see woixnde(n). 
ywoned, see 'w’une(xL). 
ywonne, see winiie(ii). 
ywrite, ywys, see wnte(n), iwis. 
ywpoii5t, see wircbe(n). 
ywyte(n), see iwite(n). 
yzed, see seie(n). 

yze]?, yzy, yzyep, yzy5k? ise(n). 
yzi5t, yai, see ise(n). 


Z. 

zaule, see saule. 

zayst (zayj?), see seie(n). 

zeebe (zekp), see secbe(n). 

zelve, see selh 

zend, see seiide(n). 

zenne, see sixine. 

zeve, zig&e, see seve(n), si])- 

zip, zixti, see seie(ii), sixti. 

zorntyme, adv., Kt. *= ML snmtime; 

OE. sumtima; sometime, 21^, 15. 
z^ng, sb., Kt. « Ml. sgng ; OE. sang, 
sgng; song\ pi. zgnges, 215, 23. 
zor^e (zor^en), zdp, see sor^e, sop. 
zor5e(n), whv,, Kt. = Ml. sor5e(n) ; 
OE. sorgian; grieve, sorrow; pn 
pi. zorjep, 315, 16. 

zoplicbe, adv,, Kt. - Ml. sdpllche 
(like) ; OE. so? 51 ice ; truly, 218, 24. 
ZU9, zuyebe, sec swp, swile. 
zy^pe, zyinde (z:^p), see sibt, s§(n). 
zyker, adJ., Kt, - Ml. siker, cf. Dan. 
sikker, OFris. siker ; certain, sure, 
219, 28. 
zyp, see se(n). 



Made and Printed in Great Britain. 
Richard Clav & Sons, Limited. 
Printers, Bungay, Suffolk. 










